
=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
arXiv:astro-ph/0506205v3  3 Aug 2005
Accepted for Publication in the Astronomical Journal
Near Infrared Imaging Survey of Bok Globules: Density Structure
Ryo Kandori
Department of Astronomical Science, Graduate University for Advanced Studies (Sokendai),
2-21-1 Osawa, Mitaka, Tokyo 181-8588, Japan; Present address: Optical and Infrared Astronomy
Division, National Astronomical Observatory of Japan, 2-21-1 Osawa, Mitaka, Tokyo 181-8588,
Japan (kandori@optik.mtk.nao.ac.jp)
Yasushi Nakajima, Motohide Tamura, Ken’ichi Tatematsu
National Astronomical Observatory of Japan, 2-21-1 Osawa, Mitaka, Tokyo 181-8588, Japan
(yas@optik.mtk.nao.ac.jp, hide@optik.mtk.nao.ac.jp, k.tatematsu@nao.ac.jp)
Yuri Aikawa
Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, Kobe University, Kobe 657-8501, Japan
(aikawa@kobe-u.ac.jp)
Takahiro Naoi
Department of Earth and Planetary Science, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku,
Tokyo 113-0033, Japan (naoi@subaru.naoj.org)
Koji Sugitani
Institute of Natural Sciences, Nagoya City University, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya 467-8501, Japan
(sugitani@nsc.nagoya-cu.ac.jp)
Hidehiko Nakaya
Subaru Telescope, National Astronomical Observatory of Japan, 650 North A´ohoku Place, Hilo,
HI 96720, USA (nakaya@subaru.naoj.org)
Takahiro Nagayama, Tetsuya Nagata
Department of Astronomy, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan
(nagayama@kusastro.kyoto-u.ac.jp, nagata@kusastro.kyoto-u.ac.jp)
Mikio Kurita, Daisuke Kato, Chie Nagashima, and Shuji Sato
Department of Astrophysics, Nagoya University, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8602, Japan
(mikio@z.phys.nagoya-u.ac.jp, kato@z.phys.nagoya-u.ac.jp, chie@z.phys.nagoya-u.ac.jp,
ssato@z.phys.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
ABSTRACT


=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
– 2 –
On the basis of near-infrared imaging observations, we derived visual extinction (AV )
distribution toward ten Bok globules through measurements of both the color excess
(EH−K) and the stellar density at J, H, and Ks (star count). Radial column density
proﬁles for each globule were analyzed with the Bonnor-Ebert sphere model. Using
the data of our ten globules and four globules in the literature, we investigated the
stability of globules on the basis of ξmax, which characterizes the Bonnor-Ebert sphere
as well as the stability of the equilibrium state against the gravitational collapse. We
found that more than half of starless globules are located near the critical state (ξmax =
6.5 ± 2).
Thus, we suggest that a nearly critical Bonnor-Ebert sphere characterizes
the typical density structure of starless globules.
Remaining starless globules show
clearly unstable states (ξmax > 10).
Since unstable equilibrium states are not long
maintained, we expect that these globules are on the way to gravitational collapse or
that they are stabilized by non-thermal support. It was also found that all the star-
forming globules show unstable solutions of ξmax > 10, which is consistent with the
fact that they have started gravitational collapse. We investigated the evolution of a
collapsing gas sphere whose initial condition is a nearly critical Bonnor-Ebert sphere.
We found that the column density proﬁles of the collapsing sphere mimic those of
the static Bonnor-Ebert spheres in unstable equilibrium.
The collapsing gas sphere
resembles marginally unstable Bonnor-Ebert spheres for a long time. We found that
the frequency distribution of ξmax for the observed starless globules is consistent with
that from model calculations of the collapsing sphere. In addition to the near-infrared
observations, we carried out radio molecular line observations (C18O and N2H+) toward
the same ten globules. We conﬁrmed that most of the globules are dominated by thermal
support. The line width of each globule was used to estimate the cloud temperature
including the contribution from turbulence, with which we estimated the distance to
the globules from the Bonnor-Ebert model ﬁtting.
Subject headings: ISM: clouds — dust, extinction — ISM: globules — stars: formation


=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
– 3 –
1.
Introduction
Probing the physical evolution of dense cores toward the onset of star formation is of great
importance in understanding the nature of the star formation process. The star formation process
as well as the characteristics of forming stars are probably mostly determined by the properties of
the nursing cores, such as size, mass, temperature, turbulence, and density structure, right before
the gravitational collapse. In order to clarify the initial condition of star formation, it is important
to provide a number of dense core samples with well deﬁned physical properties.
Bok globules (i.e., isolated molecular cloud cores) are ideal sites for studying isolated star
formation processes because of their simple shape and isolated geometry from neighboring clouds.
These characteristics of globules enable us to model their internal structure (e.g., density). For
these reasons, detailed observations of some well-known globules have been done.
Alves et al.
(2001) reported a high-resolution dust-extinction (AV ) study of the starless globule Barnard 68,
based on near-infrared observations. They presented a radial column density proﬁle of the globule
which is well ﬁtted by the Bonnor-Ebert sphere model (Bonnor 1956; Ebert 1955). Because the
density structure is well determined, molecular abundances in Barnard 68 have been studied by
comparing dust extinction with molecular distribution (Bergin et al. 2002; Hotzel et al. 2002a,
2002b; Di Francesco et al. 2002; Lai et al. 2003).
An unbiased survey of both starless and star-forming globules is important to provide essen-
tial information on the evolution of density, velocity, and chemical structure of globules as well as
their relative lifetime. Statistical studies of globules (dense cores) have been conducted based on
the observations of thermal dust emission (e.g., Visser et al. 2001, 2002), dust extinction in the
mid-infrared (Bacmann et al. 2000), molecular line emission (e.g., Launhardt et al. 1998; Caselli et
al. 2002), and a combination of these (e.g., Tafalla et al. 2002; dust and molecular line emissions).
However, no statistical studies of the density structure of globules based on the near-infrared ex-
tinction have been carried out. Recently, the dust temperature gradient in cold starless cores (e.g.,
Evans et al. 2001; Ward-Thompson, Andre, & Kirk 2002) has been pointed out, and this may
systematically aﬀect the column density distribution derived by assuming a constant dust tem-
perature. The measurements of extinction in the mid-infrared surface photometry (e.g., Bacmann
et al. 2000) can also be aﬀected by dust temperature distributions, because both absorption and
emission from the line-of-sight medium should be taken into account at these wavelengths. As a
column density tracer, near-infrared extinction measurement is one of the most straightforward
methods with no ambiguity caused by dust temperature distribution.
Near-infrared extinction
measurements can trace dust column densities at low-density outer regions of the globules, where
(sub)millimeter dust emission is hard to detect.
The aim of our near-infrared (J, H, and Ks) imaging survey of Bok globules is to reveal the
evolution of radial density structures of globules from the starless to protostellar phases as well as to
derive their fundamental physical parameters (e.g., size, temperature, mass, and external pressure)
on the basis of the measurements of dust extinction. We investigated the radial AV distribution
for each globule using the Bonnor-Ebert sphere model. The solutions of the Bonnor-Ebert sphere
can be characterized by the dimensionless radial parameter ξmax, which describes the stability of
the gas sphere against gravitational collapse, and the critical state is achieved at ξmax=6.5. By


=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
– 4 –
combining our results for ten Bok globules with previous reports on four sources, we investigate the
diﬀerence in physical properties, in particular the ξmax value, between the globules in the starless
phase and those in the star-forming (protostellar or gravitational collase) phase, which is likely
to be related to the diﬀerence in evolutionary stages of the globules. In order to investigate the
velocity structure of globules, we observed the same globules using the 45 m radio telescope of
Nobeyama Radio Observatory with the C18O (J = 1 →0) and/or N2H+ (J = 1 →0) molecular
lines.
The procedures of our observations and data reduction are described in § 2. The distribution
of dust extinction (AV ) for each globule is obtained in order to derive the radial AV proﬁle and to
ﬁt it by the Bonnor-Ebert sphere model (§ 3 and 4). We investigate the diﬀerence in the physical
properties between the starless and star-forming globules and discuss implications for the evolution
of globules in § 5. Our conclusions are summarized in § 6.
2.
Observations and Data Reduction
2.1.
Source Selection
We observed ten Bok globules, CB 87, CB 110, CB 131, CB 134, CB 161, CB 184, CB 188,
FeSt 1-457, Lynds 495, and Lynds 498. These were selected from a uniﬁed catalog of dark clouds
(Dutra & Bica 2002; compilation of 21 dark cloud catalogs) with the following criteria: (1) globules
whose angular sizes are less than ∼5′, (2) those having simple shapes (circular or elliptical), (3)
those well isolated from neighboring clouds, (4) those located in the solar neighborhood (distance
of less than ∼500 pc), and (5) those observable from both hemispheres. Our selection criteria of
(1) to (4) are similar to those used in the CB catalog (Clemens & Barvainis 1988), which lists 248
small, isolated, optically selected dark clouds. Typical angular size and ellipticity of dark clouds in
the CB catalog are ∼3′ and ∼2, respectively (see, Figures 1 and 2 of Clemens & Barvainis 1988).
In the CB catalog, the fraction of large (e.g., ≫5′) and/or highly elliptical (e.g., ellipticity ≫2)
clouds with isolated geometry is small. The properties of the observed globules are summarized in
Table 1. Column 1 lists the name of the globule, Columns 2 and 3 list the equatorial coordinates
(J2000) of the center of the target ﬁeld. Column 4 gives the distance to the globule from the catalog
(Dutra & Bica 2002). The distance to the nearby and compact globules is diﬃcult to determine.
The lack of foreground stars toward globules makes spectro-photometric distance measurements
impossible, and the distance estimation from LSR velocity (kinematic distance) is not reliable
for nearby clouds.
Thus, the listed distances are only values assumed by associating observed
globules with neighboring larger molecular clouds whose distance is known. Column 5 represents
the association of IRAS point sources within the optical boundary of each globule. We classiﬁed
globules into starless and star-forming clouds based on the association of IRAS point sources∗. A
∗Recently, a low luminosity protostar was discovered toward the globule Lynds 1014, which is known to accompany
no IRAS point sources, using the Spitzer Space Telescope (Young et al. 2004). Though Spitzer data are useful to
clarify whether globules contain protostars or not, Spitzer data is available only for one source, CB 131, among the
“IRAS-less” globules in Table 1. We brieﬂy checked mid-infrared data of the Spitzer telescope toward CB 131 and
found that there is no protostar candidates near the center of the globule. Though a source is located near the globule


=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
– 5 –
Class I protostar (IRAS 19179+1129) is associated with CB 188 (Launhardt 1996; Yun & Clemens
1992), whereas no evidence of star formation is shown for the other nine globules. For CB 184, a
Class II source (IRAS 19116+1623) is located near the globule (Launhardt 1996), but its physical
association with the globule is not known. Since star-forming activity is not taking place around the
center of CB 184, we will treat CB 184 as a starless globule in this paper. The Bonnor-Ebert model
ﬁtting studies of globules based on near-infrared extinction have been reported in four sources in
the literature: Barnard 68 (Alves et al. 2001), Barnard 335 (Harvey et al. 2001), Coalsack Globule
II (Lada et al. 2004; Racca et al. 2002), and Lynds 694-2 (Harvey et al. 2003). A Class 0 protostar
(IRAS 19345+0727) is associated with Barnard 335. The other globules have no IRAS sources,
while Lynds 694-2 shows strong evidence of gas inward motion (Lee, Myers, & Tafalla 1999, 2001;
Lee, Myers, & Plume 2004). Thus, we will classify Lynds 694-2 as a star-forming globule in this
paper. There are two recent reports on the density structure of Coalsack Globule II based on similar
analyses. We mainly refer to the observations of Lada et al. (2004) because their near-infrared
observations are more sensitive than those of Racca et al. (2002).
2.2.
Near-Infrared Data
We carried out near-infrared (J, H, and Ks) imaging observations of Bok globules using the in-
frared camera SIRIUS (Simultaneous three-color InfraRed Imager for Unbiased Surveys; Nagayama
et al. 2003; Nagashima et al. 1999) on the 1.4 m telescope, IRSF (InfraRed Survey Facility), at
the South African Astronomical Observatory (SAAO). Observations were made over two periods
from 2002 July 30 to August 12 and from 2003 June 24 to July 14. SIRIUS has three 1024×1024
pixel HgCdTe infrared detectors (HAWAII array), which enables us to take J, H, and Ks images
simultaneously. IRSF/SIRIUS can image a large FOV of ∼7.′7×7.′7 with a scale of 0.′′45/pixel, and
the limiting magnitudes (S/N=10) for a typical 10-minute exposure time reach 18.9, 18.3, and 17.3
mag at J, H, and Ks, respectively. Thus, this survey is much deeper than previous extensive sur-
veys (e.g., 2MASS, DENIS). For each globule, we performed a 15-minute integration with a set of
dithered 20 s or 30 s exposures except CB 110 and FeSt 1-457, whose integration times are 45 and
60 minutes, respectively. The dithered spatial interval was 30′′ or 40′′. Since the apparent diameter
of each target globule is less than 5′, we covered its entire extent at one time. The typical seeing
during the observations was 0.′′9−1.′′4 (FWHM), corresponding to 2−3 pixels. To correct detector
ﬂatness and pixel-to-pixel variation, we obtained twilight ﬂat and dark frames at the beginning and
end of the nights. We observed some sets of near-infrared standard stars listed by Persson et al.
(1998) during the observations for photometric calibration.
We processed the observed data in a standard way of near-infrared image reduction (i.e., dark
subtraction, ﬂat-ﬁeld correction, and median sky subtraction) with the IRAF† (Image Reduction
and Analysis Facility) and the IDL (Interactive Data Language, by Research Systems, Inc.) rou-
tines. After subtraction of averaged dark frame, each object frame was divided by normalized ﬂat
on the 24 µm image, it is not known whether the source is a protostar associated with CB 131.
†IRAF is distributed by the National Optical Astronomy Observatories, which are operated by the Association of
Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc., under cooperative agreement with the National Science Foundation.


=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
– 6 –
frames. For correcting thermal emission pattern and the fringe pattern from the atomospheric OH
emission, we constructed a median sky frame to be subtracted from the object frame. Since all
the observed targets are located in the very crowded ﬁeld of the Milky Way, we did not adopt
the self-sky, with which the residual signal of (bright) stars cannot be excluded on the resulting
self-sky frame. Therefore, we constructed the sky frame for each band by taking the median of
dithered frames toward the diﬀerent several (four to eight) objects observed in the same night,
which resulted in a sky frame with no stellar residuals. This “average” median sky does not re-
ﬂect the actual sky for each object because the median was taken across several object frames.
We compared the “average” median sky frame with the self-sky frame for each object in order to
correct their diﬀerent sky levels, and the ﬁnal (level-matched) median sky frames were made for
each object. Though the thermal emission pattern is adequately corrected in the ﬁnal median sky
frames, the OH fringe pattern is time-averaged. We conﬁrmed that the eﬀect of the time-variation
of the OH fringe pattern is within acceptable levels by checking the sky noise level of the ﬁnal
combined object frames. After the sky subtraction and frame-registration, we combined all the
dithered images for each object with a 3σ clipping. We show three-color (JHKs) composite images
of globules in Figure 1.
For the source detection and photometry, we applied the IRAF/DAOPHOT package (Stetson
1987) to the images. We measured the instrumental magnitudes of the detected stars having a
peak intensity greater than 4.0 σ noise level above the sky background by ﬁtting a point-spread
function (PSF) and subtracting it from the image. We iteratively performed stellar detections and
psf-ﬁtting photometries to the source-subtracted image in order to collect overlooked sources in
the previous procedure. We manually checked the results of the photometries and removed some
false detections by visual inspection. We summarize the results of stellar detection in Table 2. For
calculating the plate solution, we matched the pixel coordinates of a number of detected stars with
the celestial coordinates of their counterparts in the 2MASS point source catalog (Cutri et al. 2003)
and obtained the transformation coeﬃcient using the IRAF/IMCOORDS package, which resulted
in an acceptable positional error of less than 0.′′5 (rms). All the stars detected in our observations
were cataloged separately with respect to the ﬁlters (JHKs). These stars of single-band detections
were used to generate an extinction map at each band with a star count method. We applied the
following equations for the color conversion from the IRSF to the standard CTIO/CIT photometric
system:
(J −H)CIT
=
0.980×(J −H)IRSF + 0.029
for (J −H)IRSF ≥0.35,
(1)
(J −H)CIT
=
1.047×(J −H)IRSF
for (J −H)IRSF < 0.35,
(2)
(H −K)CIT
=
0.912×(H −KS)IRSF
(3)
These were derived from measurements of red standard stars (see, Nakajima et al. 2004 for details).
2.3.
Molecular Line Data
We have carried out molecular line observations toward ten globules using the 45 m radio
telescope of Nobeyama Radio Observatory over four observing periods (2003 March 10-19, 2003
April 8-10, 2004 January 9-12, and 2004 February 3-10). The observed objects are the same as those


=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
– 7 –
observed by IRSF/SIRIUS. The receiver employed was the 25-element focal-plane array receiver
BEARS consisting of double-sideband SIS mixers (Sunada et al. 2000). All the target globules in
Table 1 are mapped in position-switching mode in C18O (J = 1 →0) at 109.782173 GHz (JPL
catalog; see, http://spec.jpl.nasa.gov/) and/or N2H+ (J = 1 →0) at 93.1737767 GHz (Caselli,
Myers & Thaddeus 1995) on a 13.′′7 grid spacing. The half-power beamwidth for each element
beam was estimated to be ∼17.′′8 at 93 GHz and ∼15.′′1 at 109 GHz. The map coverage (∼4′×4′)
is suﬃciently large compared with the extinction feature of globules. As a back end, we used a
digital autocorrelator with a 37.8 kHz frequency resolution (∼0.12 kms−1 at 93 GHz, and ∼0.10
kms−1 at 109 GHz). The intensity was calibrated using the standard chopper-wheel method, and
is expressed in terms of the corrected antenna temperature T ∗
A. To correct for the sideband ratio,
we calibrated T ∗
A using the intensity obtained with the single-sideband receiver S100. The scaling
factor from T ∗
A of BEARS to that of S100 for N2H+ (J = 1 →0) was measured by ourselves, and
that for C18O (J = 1 →0) was provided by the observatory. A typical value of the scaling factor
for each BEARS element was ∼1.5. We estimated the main beam eﬃciency of S100 at 93 and 109
GHz to be 0.515 and 0.442, respectively, by interpolating values at 86, 100, and 115 GHz provided
by the observatory. The pointing accuracy was typically better than 7′′ by observing SiO maser
sources at 43 GHz every 1-1.5 hours during the observations.
3.
Derivation of AV and Molecular Line Parameters
AV measurement is one of the most straightforward ways to probe the density structure of
dark clouds. There are two standard ways to do extinction mapping; one is the star count method
(e.g., Dickman 1978; Cambr´esy 1999; Dobashi et al. 2005) based on the measurements of the stellar
density, and the other is the near-infrared color excess (NICE) method (Lada et al. 1994) based on
measurements of the stellar color excess (e.g., EH−K). By considering the stellar density in H and
Ks at the densest region of globules, we decided which method is better for each target globule. We
analyzed CB 131, CB 134 and CB 188 with the star count method and analyzed the other globules
with the NICE method.
3.1.
Star Count
On the basis of the stars detected in the J, H, and Ks bands, we derived extinction maps (AJ,
AH, and AKs) for CB 131, CB 134, and CB 188 using the star count method (see, e.g., Kandori et
al. 2003). A logarithmic cumulative stellar density log N measured at the magnitude mλ,0 can be
converted to extinction Aλ as
Aλ (∆α, ∆δ, mλ,0) = mλ,0 −f −1 [log N(∆α, ∆δ, mλ,0)]
(4)
where ∆α and ∆δ are the oﬀset positions from the equatorial coordinate of image center, and
f −1 is the inverse function of f = log Nref(mλ), which is the logarithmic cumulative luminosity
function (i.e., Wolf diagram; Wolf 1923) constructed in the extinction-free reference ﬁeld (see Fig.
2). Though f is often assumed to be linear as f = a+bmλ, we ﬁtted it with a 4th-order polynomial
because the function shows a slightly curved shape.


=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
– 8 –
To measure stellar density distribution, log N(∆α, ∆δ, mλ,0), we arranged circular cells (typi-
cally ∼30′′ in diameter) separated by 9′′ intervals on each observed ﬁeld (∼7′×7′ area), and counted
the number of stars falling in the cells up to the threshold magnitude mλ,0 (see Table 2 for the
deﬁnition) which is well above the limiting magnitudes. The diameter of circular cells depends on
the stellar density in each cloud ﬁeld. We smoothed the stellar density map with a Gaussian ﬁlter
(FWHM=13.′′5) to reduce noise. In order to derive AJ, AH, and AKs, we numerically calculated
f −1 in equation (4) after substituting the actually measured stellar density log N(∆α, ∆δ, mλ,0)
into f −1. In the resulting extinction maps, AJ tends to be saturated at the densest region of the
cloud, but suﬃciently reveals the diﬀuse extinction feature around the cloud, and AKs has the
opposite tendency. In order to relieve saturation, we made a composite AV map by combining the
AJ, AH, and AKs data with the following equation:
AV
=
αRKsV AKs + (1 −α)RHV AH
for AH ≥Amax
H
/2
(5)
AV
=
βRHV AH + (1 −β)RJV AJ
for AH < Amax
H
/2
(6)
where α and β are the weighting parameters deﬁned as AH/Amax
H
and AH/(Amax
H
/2) where Amax
H
denotes the maximum value of AH in each analyzing ﬁeld. The RλV denotes the standard conversion
factor from Aλ to AV in Rieke & Lebofsky (1985), which is 3.55 and 5.71 for J and H, respectively.
For Ks, we assumed AV = 9.44AKs on the basis of equation (3) and the conversion factors in Rieke
& Lebofsky (1985). These conversion factors depend on the assumption of dust optical properties,
in particular RV . We discuss systematic uncertainties in the derivation of AV in the Appendix. The
resulting AV maps for CB 131, CB 134, and CB 188 are shown in Figure 2. Typical uncertainty of
AV in the reference ﬁeld (AV ∼0 mag) is estimated to be ∼0.9 mag.
3.2.
Near-Infrared Color Excess
On the basis of the stars detected both in the H, and Ks bands, we derived extinction (AV )
maps for CB 87, CB 110, CB 161, CB 184, FeSt 1-457, Lynds 495, and Lynds 498 using the NICE
method. If we assume that the population of stars toward the observed ﬁeld is invariable, the mean
stellar color in the reference ﬁeld < H −K >ref can be used as the zero point of color excess. The
color excess distribution toward globules can be derived by subtracting < H −K >ref from the
observed H −K of stars. Since the extent of each analyzed ﬁeld is relatively small (∼7′ × 7′), our
assumption on invariant stellar population seems plausible. To measure color excess distribution,
we arranged circular cells (∼30′′ diameter) spaced at 9′′ (the same alignment as used in the star
count analysis) on each observed ﬁeld. We calculated the mean stellar color in each cell and derived
their color excess as
EH−K (∆α, ∆δ) =
" N
X
i=1
(H −K)i
N
#
(∆α, ∆δ) −⟨H −K⟩ref,
(7)
where (H −K)i is the color index of the i-th star in a cell, and N is the number of stars falling in
a cell. ⟨H −K⟩ref is the mean color of stars in the reference ﬁeld (see, Fig. 2). We converted the
H−K color excess to AV using the reddening law of Rieke & Lebofsky (1985) as AV = 15.9×EH−K.
We then smoothed the resulting AV map in the same manner as used in the star count analysis.


=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
– 9 –
The resulting AV maps are shown in Figure 2. Typical uncertainty of AV in the reference ﬁeld
(AV ∼0 mag) is estimated to be ∼0.6 mag.
3.3.
Molecular Line Parameters
We derived the observed molecular line parameters, LSR velocity, line width, and optical depth,
for each globule. We observed N2H+ (J = 1 →0) for FeSt 1-457 and C18O (J = 1 →0) for the
other globules. We show the spectrum observed at the center of each globule in Figure 3. For the
N2H+ spectrum ﬁtting we took into account their hyperﬁne structure and line optical depth eﬀect
(using the same procedure as described in Tatematsu et al. 2004). The intrinsic relative intensity
and rest frequency of hyperﬁne components are taken from Tin´e et al. (2000) and Caselli et al.
(1995), respectively.
The observed line width ∆Vobs of the globule ranges from ∼0.2 to ∼0.5 km s−1 (Table 3). The
kinetic temperature Tk of low mass dense cores is known to be ∼10 K (e.g., Benson & Myers 1989).
Thus, it is natural to attribute the excess in the observed line width with respect to the thermal
line width (0.13 km s−1 for C18O and N2H+) to the contribution from non-thermal turbulence in
globules. We estimated non-thermal line width ∆VNT of each globule by assuming that Tk is equal
to 10 K. ∆VNT can be obtained from ∆V 2
NT = ∆V 2
obs −8ln2kTk/mobs, where mobs is the mass of
the observed molecule. The thermal line width ∆VT = (8ln2kTk/m)1/2 for Tk = 10 K is 0.443 km
s−1, where m is the mean molecular weight (2.33 amu). Derived line parameters are listed in Table
3. We found that thermal line width for the mean molecular weight is larger than non-thermal
line width for most of the observed globules. It is likely that observed globules are dominated by
thermal support with smaller contribution from the non-thermal turbulence. The thermal and non-
thermal components of the line width can be characterized by a temperature as Tk = ∆V 2
Tm/k8ln2
and TNT = ∆V 2
NTm/k8ln2, respectively. We derived Teﬀ= Tk + TNT for each globule in Table 3
as a cloud-supporting temperature which includes non-thermal contribution. In order to estimate
the distance to the globules, we will use Teﬀin combination with the Bonnor-Ebert model ﬁtting
of globules in §4.2.2. In this paper, we only use the information on molecular line width. Detailed
studies such as comparison between dust extinction and molecular distribution will be reported in
a subsequent paper.
4.
Density Structure
4.1.
Bonnor-Ebert Sphere Model
In order to model the internal density structure of Bok globules, we used the Bonnor-Ebert
sphere model (Bonnor 1956; Ebert 1955), which is a modiﬁed Lane-Emden equation describing a
pressure-conﬁned, self-gravitating isothermal gas sphere in hydrostatic equilibrium. The density
structure of a Bonnor-Ebert sphere can be obtained by solving the following equation:
1
ξ2
d
dξ

ξ2 dφ
dξ

= e−φ
(8)


=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
– 10 –
where φ is the logarithmic density contrast, φ(ξ) = −ln(ρ/ρc); ρ and ρc are the volume density and
central volume density, respectively. ξ is the dimensionless radial parameter, ξ = (r/Cs)√4πGρc;
r, G, and Cs are the radius, gravitational constant, and isothermal sound speed, Cs = (kT/m)1/2,
where k, T, and m are the Boltzmann constant, kinetic temperature, and mean mass of the molecule
(2.33 amu), respectively. Under the standard boundary conditions, φ(0) = 0 (i.e., ρ = ρc at r = 0)
and dφ(0)/dξ = 0 (i.e., dρ/dr = 0 at r = 0), equation (8) can be solved with numerical integration.
If the gas sphere is conﬁned by external pressure Pext at the core boundary radius R, the solutions
of the Bonnor-Ebert sphere can be characterized by the dimensionless radius ξmax = ξ(r = R) as
ξmax = R
Cs
p
4πGρc.
(9)
ξmax is a stability measure of the gas sphere against the gravitational collapse (Bonnor 1956; Ebert
1955). Critical state is achieved at ξmax = 6.5 corresponding to the density contrast of ρc/ρR = 14.
For a solution with ξmax > 6.5, the equilibrium state is unstable to the gravitational collapse. The
Bonnor-Ebert sphere mass M and the external pressure Pext are calculated as
M
=
4πα3ρcξ2
max
dφ
dξ

ξ=ξmax
(10)
Pext
=
Cs2ρce−φ(ξmax)
(11)
where α = Cs/(4πGρc)1/2.
4.2.
Bonnor-Ebert Model Fitting of Bok Globules
4.2.1.
Derivation of Column Density Proﬁle
For a comparison of observational data (i.e., AV ) with a theoretical Bonnor-Ebert density
distribution, radial AV proﬁles for each globule were constructed.
We set annuli spaced at 9′′
around the center of the core that is the AV intensity peak (see Table 4), and calculated averaged
AV values at each annulus (see Figure 4). For apparently elliptical globules (CB 87, CB 161, and
CB 184) we performed ellipse ﬁtting to the AV distribution, and “equivalent” radius, r =
√
ab,
was substituted for radius where a and b are the respective semi-minor and semi-major axes of the
ellipse for the cores. Fitted ellipticity and position angle for the globules are listed in Table 4. It
is possible that the observed globules with circular projected shapes are actually pole-on prolate
ellipsoids. In this case, the shape of the observed AV proﬁle should be steeper than that for the
intrinsic shape. Since there is no eﬀective method for estimating how ellongated a globule is along
the line of sight, we assumed that the line of sight length of globules is the same as the projected
diameter.
We manually masked extinction features likely to be unrelated to the globules (e.g., the other
clouds on the same image, diﬀuse streaming feature; see Fig. 2), and masked regions were omitted in
the circularly averaging procedure. Furthermore we recalibrated the relative zero point of extinction
for the analyzed globules by subtracting background extinction (i.e., AV oﬀset value). The AV
oﬀsets have been derived from averaging AV within the annulus of 150′′ to 200′′ radius, which is
suﬃciently larger than the primary extinction feature of globules. Actually, the subtracted values


=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
– 11 –
as AV oﬀset are small (typically ∼0.5 mag), and it solely depends on where we set the reference
ﬁelds in the star count or color excess analysis. In order to convert AV to the H2 column density,
we used the relationship between the optical color excess EB−V and the hydrogen column density,
N(HI + H2)/EB−V = 5.8 × 1021 cm−2 mag−1 (Bohlin, Savage, & Drake 1978), where N(HI + H2)
= N(HI)+2N(H2). This relationship is based on the UV absorption line measurements toward the
stars of slightly obscured lines of sight (EB−V <∼0.5 mag). By assuming that (1) all hydrogen in the
cloud is in a molecular form and that (2) the ratio of total-to-selective extinction RV (≡AV /EB−V )
is equal to the standard ISM value of 3.1 (e.g., Whittet 1992), we obtained N(H2)/AV = 9.4× 1020
cm−2 mag−1, and used it to derive the H2 column density. The resulting column density proﬁles
are shown in Figure 4.
4.2.2.
Derivation of Model Parameters
In order to produce Bonnor-Ebert model density proﬁles, we performed numerical integration
of equation (8). Since the Bonnor-Ebert sphere is characterized by a single parameter ξmax (Eq.
[9]), best-ﬁt ξmax for each globule can be determined by comparing model column density proﬁles
with those obtained from observations. We integrated the model density proﬁle along the lines of
sight on grids to calculate the column density proﬁle. In order to match the resolution between
the model and the observed column density data, the model column density on the ∆α-∆δ plane
was convolved with the beam used in the star count or color excess analysis (cylinder-shaped beam
convolved with the Gaussian). In the χ2-procedure, the radial proﬁle was ﬁtted from the minimum
radius (center) to the radius where the observed AV value reaches ∼1 mag (detection limit). In
some cores (Lynds 495 and Lynds 498), deviation of observed proﬁles from the Bonnor-Ebert sphere
is found at diﬀuse outskirts (AV <∼1 mag), which was excluded in the ﬁtting. The χ2-ﬁtting results
are not sensitive to the selection of the maximum radius for ﬁtting part unless there is no signiﬁcant
kink in the column density proﬁle.
In Figure 4, we show the results of the Bonnor-Ebert ﬁt to the radial column density proﬁle
of the globules. The dots and error bars represent the average N(H2) values at each annulus of 9′′
intervals and the rms deviation of data points in each annulus, respectively. The solid line denotes
the radial column density proﬁle of the best-ﬁt Bonnor-Ebert sphere which is convolved with beam
used in the AV measurements. The dashed line denotes the Bonnor-Ebert model proﬁle before
the convolution. In Table 4, we list the derived Bonnor-Ebert parameters for globules including
previous reports on four sources (Barnard 68, Barnard 335, Coalsack Globule II, and Lynds 694-2).
The error of each parameter in the table represents 1σ deviation in the χ2 density proﬁle ﬁtting.
We discuss possible systematic uncertainties in the derivation of ξmax in the Appendix.
Recently, Hotzel et al. (2002b) and Lai et al. (2003) presented detailed discussion on the
relation between the physical parameters of the Bonnor-Ebert sphere. Substituting the relations of
R = θRd ∝d and ρc ∝Nc(H2)θ−1
R d−1 ∝d−1 into equation (9), we can obtain d−1T =constant (Lai
et al. 2003). The distance d or temperature T of globules should be accurately determined from
observations. Since there were no accurate methods for measuring distance to the starless, compact,
and nearby (d <∼500 pc) globules except for the limited cases (e.g., interaction with HII region of
known distance, existence of foreground stars toward them), the distances listed in Table 1 serve


=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
– 12 –
as the ﬁrst reliable values. If we use the initially assumed distance dini, the necessary temperature
for the Bonnor-Ebert sphere TBE can be determined. If we assume that Teﬀ(= Tk + TNT) from
our molecular line observations (see §3.3) can approximate eﬀective supporting temperature of the
cloud‡, the corrected distance to the globule, d = (Teﬀ/TBE)dini, can be determined. Finally we
derived all the physical parameters of best-ﬁt Bonnor-Ebert spheres (e.g., radius, central density,
and mass) for the above “distance-assumed” and “temperature-assumed” cases as listed in Table 5.
We note that the “temperature-assumed” distance to the starless globule FeSt 1-457 is estimated
to be ∼70 pc, which would make this globule one of the nearest dark clouds.
5.
Discussion: Stability and Evolution of Globules
In this section, we discuss the internal structure and stability of globules by using the data of
the ten globules from our observations and four from the literature.
5.1.
Physical Properties of Globules
Though we have estimated physical properties of globules by assuming the Bonnor-Ebert
model, there are actually other theoretical models (e.g., Shu 1977; Larson 1969; Penston 1969;
McLaughlin & Pudritz 1997; Plummer 1911). Bacmann et al. (2000) presented that a Bonnor-
Ebert-like model (a ﬁnite size sphere with inner uniform density region and ρ ∝r−2 outer envelope)
ﬁts well with the column density proﬁle of globules obtained from mid-infrared 7 µm absorption
measurements, but that a singular-isothermal-sphere (SIS) or singular logotrope sphere cannot
reproduce the observed proﬁle well. By considering the resolution of our extinction maps (∼30′′)
and possible geometric error of globules (e.g., deviation from spherical symmetry), it is not possible
to make meaningful comparisons between the Bonnor-Ebert model and other Bonnor-Ebert-like
models (see, e.g., Figure 2 in Harvey et al. 2003, which compares the Bonnor-Ebert model with a
Plummer-like model). Here, we simply assume the Bonnor-Ebert model.
As described in the previous section, the dimensionless radial parameter ξmax determines the
shape of a Bonnor-Ebert density proﬁle as well as the stability of the equilibrium state against
the gravitational collapse. We plot globules on the ξmax versus density contrast diagram in the
upper panel of Figure 5. Since ξmax has one-to-one correspondence with density contrast, all the
Bonnor-Ebert spheres are distributed along the solid curved line. We found that more than half
of starless globules (7 out of 11 sources) are located near the critical state, ξmax = 6.5 ± 2. Thus,
we suggest that a nearly critical Bonnor-Ebert sphere characterizes the typical density structure of
starless globules. The remaining starless globules show clearly unstable states (ξmax > 10). When
we divide starless globules into two groups with respect to the critical line (ξmax = 6.5), there
are three stable starless globules and eight unstable starless globules.
The majority of starless
‡Theoretically, supporting force in a Bonnor-Ebert sphere is purely thermal pressure, but actual clouds also have
non-thermal support, e.g., turbulence and magnetic ﬁelds, which are widely observed in molecular clouds (see, e.g.,
Larson 2003). We assume that non-thermal support can be included in the model by replacing the isothermal sound
speed Cs = (kTk/m)1/2 in equation (9) by the eﬀective sound speed Ceﬀ= (kTeﬀ/m)1/2.


=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
– 13 –
globules is located in the unstable states (ξmax > 6.5) if the uncertainties in ξmax are not taken
into account. We also found that all the star-forming globules have larger ξmax values (> 10) than
that of the critical Bonnor-Ebert equilibrium state, which is consistent with the fact that they have
started gravitational collapse. In the lower panel of Figure 5, we show the ﬁtting error in ξmax
for each globule. Filled gray circles denote the ﬁtting results for some globules with considerable
features of ambient extinction if the masked region on the AV map (see Fig 2) is included in the
derivation of the column density proﬁle. In addition to the ξmax diagram in Figure 5, we made
histograms of logarithmic density contrast for starless and star-forming globules (Figure 6). Similar
characteristics as descrived above can also be seen in the histograms.
To see the relationships between derived physical properties of globules in Tables 4 and 5, we
made correlation diagrams between density contrast and the other physical parameters of globules
in Figure 7. We consider that the horizontal axis (density contrast) represents the evolutionary
states of globules, because globules should evolve toward higher central condensation to form stars.
We can see from panels (e) and (f) in the ﬁgure that temperature Teﬀand external pressure Pext
of globules appear roughly constant regardless of the density contrast. If we assume constant Teﬀ
and Pext, the Bonnor-Ebert model parameters for each density contrast value can be constrained.
The broken line in each panel is the relationship for the Bonnor-Ebert spheres with a constant Teﬀ
of 13.2 K and Pext of 5.3 × 104 K cm−3, which are the median values for the globule samples. The
value of Pext is larger than the previously reported ISM pressure in the solar vicinity of ∼1.8× 104
K cm−3 (McKee 1999).
The overall trend in the data point distributions in Figure 7 can be approximated by Bonnor-
Ebert spheres with a constant “eﬀective” temperature and a constant external pressure.
The
relations for the radius and mass (panels [c] and [d]) remain roughly constant against the density
contrast, suggesting that these quantities are not sensitive to the evolutionary states of globules.
This result agrees with the N2H+ observations of molecular cloud cores in Taurus (Tatematsu et
al. 2004), in which there is no remarkable diﬀerence in core radius and mass between starless cores
and cores with stars. Since the density at core boundary is derived from Pext/Teﬀ, the density
at core center nc is directly obtained for each density contrast value and shows a proportional
relationship against the density contrast as shown in panel (b). Accordingly, the density contrast
and AV show positive correlation. The data points in panel (a) are located slightly lower than
the broken line because of a beam dilution eﬀect in the AV measurements with ∼30′′ resolution.
For molecular cloud cores located in regions of higher pressure (e.g., dark cloud complex) than in
the solar vicinity, the Bonnor-Ebert relationship in panels (a) and (b) should be shifted upward
corresponding to the larger value of Pext/Teﬀ. We can see from panel (a) that the density contrast
value is simply estimated from the AV (column density) measurements under the assumption of
the Bonnor-Ebert sphere with a constant Teﬀand Pext.
5.2.
On the Selection Bias of the Globule Samples
Here we brieﬂy consider the selection bias in our globule samples. The peak AV values for our
observed globules range from ∼6.5 to 41 mag. We selected globules that were opaque at optical
wavelengths, i.e., with few stars in the background of the cloud on the Digitized Sky Survey image.


=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
– 14 –
These sources are expected to have AV greater than at least 5 mag, and expected to be sites of
future star formation, i.e., so-called “dense cores”. The lower limit of the peak AV for the globules
may be determined by the criterion in our target selection. Thus, it is possible that the diﬀuse cores
of low column densities are not included in our globule sample as in the case of previous studies on
dense cores (e.g., Visser et al. 2002; Lee & Myers 1999; Jijina et al. 1999). We note that the lower
limit AV of ∼5 mag corresponds to a low density contrast of ∼3 if we assume a constant Teﬀand
Pext used in the previous section. The density contrast value is much less than the critical value of
14.
5.3.
Implications for the Stability of Globules
It is interesting that there are starless globules showing larger density contrast than that of the
maximum value (∼14) for stable Bonnor-Ebert spheres (see § 5.1), because unstable equilibrium
states should not last long without any extra stabilizing force such as magnetic pressure and/or
turbulent pressure (e.g., McKee & Holliman 1999). Since unstable equilibrium states cannot last
long, the globules of large density contrast should not exactly be the Bonnor-Ebert sphere even
if they mimic the Bonnor-Ebert density proﬁle. Similar results have also been reported from the
mid-infrared extinction study of starless dense cores (density contrasts are generally ∼10−80; see
Table 3 of Bacmann et al. 2000). If we consider a simple case in which the non-thermal pressure
components have the same radial dependence as the thermal pressure, the theoretical Bonnor-Ebert
model can be modiﬁed by replacing its kinetic temperature term with Teﬀas described in § 4.2.2.
In this case, the shape of the Bonnor-Ebert density proﬁle as well as the stability criteria (i.e., the
value of ξmax or maximum density contrast) hold unchanged compared with the purely thermally
supported case. This modiﬁcation cannot provide a realistic explanation for the stability of the
large density contrast globules, suggesting either that they are already collapsing toward higher
central condensation as discussed in § 5.5, or that the stabilizing mechanisms accounting for their
large density contrast are more complex. The Bonnor-Ebert assumption for the globules is not
valid in these cases. We note that our result is in marked contrast to one in which most of the
clumps observed at 850 µm dust emission in the Orion B molecular cloud complex are in stable
equilibrium based on the Bonnor-Ebert analysis (Johnstone et al. 2001).
A non-isentropic multi-pressure polytrope model (McKee & Holliman 1999) may provide suc-
cessful interpretation allowing larger density contrast than that of the critical Bonnor-Ebert sphere.
Curry & McKee (2000) developed a composite polytrope model which also allows large density con-
trast. These two models provide a stable equilibrium solution of arbitrarily large density contrast
by adjusting the contributions from the non-thermal pressure components, i.e., turbulent and mag-
netic pressure. Galli et al. (2002) studied the eﬀects of the interstellar radiation ﬁeld (ISRF) on the
cloud stability. They reported that a cloud’s maximum density contrast increases with increasing
intensity of the ISRF if the stabilizing eﬀect of external heating of the cloud as well as produced
temperature gradient are considered. These models are possible alternatives to the Bonnor-Ebert
sphere providing larger value of maximum density contrast (> 14). The shape of their density
proﬁles have characteristics similar to those of the Bonnor-Ebert sphere (see, Fig. 3 and 4 in Galli
et al. 2002, Fig. 10 in McKee & Holliman 1999), that is a ﬂat inner region surrounded by steeper


=== PDF PAGE 15 ===
– 15 –
envelope decreasing with power-law, in particular ρ ∝r−α where α ∼2.
It seems diﬃcult to
distinguish them only from the observed shape of the density proﬁle. In other words, each model
should provide similar density proﬁles and corresponding density contrast values for the same ob-
servational dataset. Detailed observations of velocity and temperature structure of dense cores are
needed to determine the most realistic model.
Major diﬀerences among the models discussed above are the supporting mechanisms of the
cloud and the stability criterion, i.e. the value of the critical density contrast. The actual density
contrast value for globules can be obtained through the Bonnor-Ebert ﬁt (see Table 4), but its
critical value is not always known (i.e., model dependent). Initial density structure of globules
right before the collapse can be determined if we constrain the value of its critical density contrast.
Initial density conditions for star formation will provide a good starting point for the theoretical
calculations. For example, given initial density proﬁle of a globule, time evolution of mass accretion
rate can be calculated (e.g. Whitworth & Ward-Thompson, 2001), which is an important parameter
for constraining the mass of a newly formed star.
In order to estimate the value of critical density contrast from observations, it should be worth
investigating the frequency distribution of density contrast for a number of starless globules. Since
unstable equilibrium states should not be long sustainable, we expect that the detection probability
for stable globules is much higher than that for unstable ones. Thus, it is likely that the frequency
distribution of density contrast shows a sharp decrease toward larger density contrasts at a certain
bin, which should correspond to the density contrast critical for collapse. Though the number of
our samples (11 sources) is not large, we present the histogram of density contrast for the starless
globules in Figure 6. The density contrast of the starless globules is mostly populated near the
critical Bonnor-Ebert sphere and decreases toward the larger density contrast, suggesting that the
actual critical density contrast of globules is not very diﬀerent from that for the Bonnor-Ebert
sphere. A statistical study with a larger number of samples is our future plan.
5.4.
Starless Globules with Stable Bonnor-Ebert Solutions
In Table 4, three out of fourteen globules are ﬁtted as a stable equilibrium state of the Bonnor-
Ebert sphere. If they are truly stable, how can stable globules form stars? Stable globules might
increase their density contrast quasi-statically toward the onset of dynamical collapse with gradually
increasing external pressure (e.g., Hennebelle et al. 2003) and/or with decreasing internal turbulent
pressure (Nakano 1998). For the case of rapid increase of external pressure, core collapse triggered
by a compression wave should be taken into account (e.g., Hennebelle et al. 2003, 2004; Motoyama
et al. 2004). Our observations of globules, however, show neither systematic decrease in Teﬀnor
increase in Pext (panels e and f of Fig. 7) toward larger density contrast. It seems that non-thermal
turbulence is already mostly dissipated even in the stable globules. Though there is only small
room for the dissipation of turbulence, a slight decrease of turbulence may initiate the collapse of
stable globules as suggested by Nakano (1998). The decrease of Teﬀ(i.e., line widths) necessary for
stable globules to start gravitational collapse is small. This is consistent with the result that there
is no apparent tendensity of systematic decrease in Teﬀagainst density contrast (panel e of Fig.
7). In the star forming regions where non-thermal motions are more prominent than globules, e.g.,


=== PDF PAGE 16 ===
– 16 –
GMCs, the dissipation of turbulence in dense cores is reported through the virial analysis (e.g.,
OMC-2/3 region in Orion: Aso et al. 2000).
Since possible evolutionary processes of stable globules are expected not to be dynamical, their
lifetime should be long compared with unstable ones. However, in our starless globule samples,
the fraction of stable globules (density contrast is less than 14) is small (3 out of 11 sources). The
observed starless globules are mostly populated near the critical Bonnor-Ebert sphere, and decreases
toward the smaller density contrast (Figure 6). This result is inconsistent with an idea that all of
nearly critical globules originated from stable low-density-contrast globules; if the idea is the case,
the number of the observed low-density-contrast globules should be larger than or comparable with
that of the nearly critical ones. Thus, it is most likely that most of the nearly critical globules
which we observed are not evolved from stable globules. The origin of nearly critical globules can
be related to the formation mechanism of globules. Further studies on this subject are desirable.
5.5.
Slow Collapse of A Nearly Critical Bonnor-Ebert Sphere
After gravitational collapse begins, globules evolve toward higher central condensation.
If
we assume an extreme case in which all the globules ﬁtted as unstable Bonnor-Ebert equilibrium
states are already collapsing, the diﬀerence in ξmax is attributed to diﬀerent evolutionary stages of
globules. Since the Bonnor-Ebert spheres provide a good ﬁt to starless globules, it is meaningful to
consider the gravitational collapse of the Bonnor-Ebert sphere (e.g., Foster & Chevalier 1993; Ogino,
Tomisaka, & Nakamura 1999). We expect that the critical Bonnor-Ebert sphere can approximate
the initial condition of collapse, because a large fraction of the starless globules are located near
the critical state, ξmax = 6.5 ± 2, as shown in § 5.1.
In order to make quantitative comparisons of the density structures between our observations
and a collapsing gas sphere starting from a nearly critical Bonnor-Ebert sphere, we used the result
of theoretical calculations from Aikawa et al. (2005). In their calculation, the central density nc(H)
and kinetic temperature T of the critical Bonnor-Ebert sphere were set as nc(H) = 2 × 104 cm−3
and T = 10 K, respectively. No cloud rotation, magnetic ﬁelds, or non-thermal turbulence were
considered, and a ﬁxed boundary condition of zero velocity was adopted at the outermost radius of
R = 0.2 pc, which is slightly larger than the critical radius of an equilibrium sphere (see, Aikawa et
al. 2005). We note that the initial condition parameters of nc(H), T, and R, are consistent with the
observed physical properties of globules around ξmax = 6.5 (see, Table 4 and 5). The initial density
distribution was multiplied by a constant factor α of 1.1 in order to initiate collapse. The slight
density enhancement of α = 1.1 is preferable to approximate the collapse from a nearly critical
Bonnor-Ebert sphere. The time scale of the collapse is several times the free-fall time, ∼1.2 × 106
yr (∼4× tﬀ), which is comparable with the observational lifetime of starless dense cores (∼106 yr;
e.g., Visser et al. 2002; Lee & Myers 1999).
Figure 8 shows the evolution of a radial column density proﬁle of the collapsing sphere for the
case of α = 1.1 described above. The gray solid line denotes initial column density proﬁle (t = 0
yr), and the black solid, dotted, and broken lines denote density proﬁle at speciﬁc times of 4.4×105,
8.9×105, and 1.1×106 yr, respectively. We found that the column density proﬁles of the collapsing


=== PDF PAGE 17 ===
– 17 –
sphere are well ﬁtted with the static Bonnor-Ebert spheres (equilibrium solutions) in the range of
ξmax < 25 within the relative diﬀerence of 2%. The plus symbols show the best-ﬁtting result for
each collapsing proﬁle with the Bonnor-Ebert sphere, which are labeled with corresponding ξmax
values; for example, the density proﬁle of the collapsing sphere at 4.4 × 105 yr mimics the unstable
Bonnor-Ebert sphere of ξmax = 7.6. This result suggests that observed starless globules with large
density contrasts are gravitationally collapsing objects. Figure 9 shows the relationship between
ξmax versus density contrast. The solid line is for the Bonnor-Ebert sphere, and the dotted line
is for the collapsing sphere which plots the best-ﬁtting ξmax values against the density contrast of
the collapsing sphere. The plus symbols denote the elapsed time of the collapsing sphere at 10%
intervals of the total collapse time. Since the free-fall time scale increases with decreasing density, a
collapsing gas sphere starting from a nearly critical Bonnor-Ebert sphere should mimic marginally
unstable Bonnor-Ebert spheres for a long time. Thus, this is qualitatively consistent with the fact
that the ξmax for the starless globules is mostly populated near the critical state (7 out of 11 sources)
and the remaining starless globules show clearly unstable states (ξmax > 10; 4 out of 11 sources)
as shown in § 5.1. From the model prediction, we note that 50% of collapsing globules should be
located in ξmax = 6.5 −8.5, and the rest of the globules should have ξmax larger than 8.5. The
fraction is consistent with our result that half of the starless globules with ξmax > 6.5 are located
in ξmax = 6.5 −8.5 (4 out of 8 sources, see Fig. 5). In Figure 10, we demonstrate the histogram
of logarithmic density contrast for starless globules (the same as Figure 6) and the time evolution
of the model collapsing sphere (solid line with dots). Each dot represents the residence time of a
collapsing sphere measured at 0.2 intervals in the logarithmic density contrast. The histogram of
the observed globule in the unstable region is consistent with that from model calculations of a
collapsing sphere.
As discussed above, the density structure of the observed globules can be explained in terms
of the slow collapse of a nearly critical Bonnor-Ebert sphere. The anticipated inward velocity from
the model calculation remains subsonic§ for a long time; the peak inward velocity is less than ∼0.1
km s−1 for ∼106 yr, which is ∼80% of the total collapse time (see, Fig. 1 of Aikawa et al. 2005).
Previous reports on the observations of CS (J = 2 →1) (blue) asymmetry proﬁle, indicative of
gravitational collapse in dense cores, show that infall candidates constitute 25 % of the starless core
samples (Lee, Myers, & Tafalla 1999). It is possible that the rest of the starless cores have a slow
collapse motion which is hard to detect. Radio molecular line observations of infall asymmetry
proﬁles with suﬃciently high velocity resolution (e.g. ∼0.01 km s−1) are necessary to conﬁrm
the scenario of slowly collapsing globules. Among the starless globules in Figure 5, the gas inward
velocity for Lynds 694-2 (ξmax = 25±3) was measured as 0.05−0.07 km s−1 (Lee, Myers, & Tafalla
2001; Lee, Myers & Plume 2004), which is consistent with the prediction from the collapse model
(α = 1.1).
§In § 4.2.2, we have estimated distance to the globules using Teﬀfrom radio molecular line observations as shown
in Table 3. A collapsing motion in the globules should contribute to the derivation of Teﬀif the motion is large
enough compared with the observed molecular line width. Since predicted inward velocity from the model is small,
it is likely that the contribution of collapsing motion to the derived distance is negligible.


=== PDF PAGE 18 ===
– 18 –
6.
Summary
We have carried out a near-infrared (J, H, and Ks) imaging survey of ten Bok globules using
the infrared camera SIRIUS on the IRSF 1.4 m telescope in South Africa. AV distributions for
the ten globules were derived through measurements of the H −K color excess or the stellar
density at J, H, and Ks (star count).
The radial column density proﬁle for each globule was
analyzed using the Bonnor-Ebert sphere model, which well ﬁts the proﬁle within observational
uncertainties, and physical properties of globules, e.g., size, central density, temperature, mass,
external pressure, and center-to-edge density contrast, were derived.
The dimensionless radial
parameter ξmax determines the shape of a Bonnor-Ebert density proﬁle as well as the stability of
the equilibrium state, e.g., the solution of ξmax > 6.5 is unstable to the gravitational collapse. We
investigated the stability of globules on the basis of ξmax for ten globules from our observations and
four globules in the literature. In addition to the near-infrared imaging, we have carried out radio
molecular line observations toward the same ten Bok globules using the 25-element focal-plane SIS
receiver BEARS on the 45 m telescope of Nobeyama Radio Observatory (NRO). We measured line
width of the globules for independent measurements of the “eﬀective” temperature including the
contribution of turbulence. It was conﬁrmed that most of the globules are dominated by thermal
support. Since the distance-dependent parameters of the Bonnor-Ebert sphere were derived using
the initially assumed distance to the globules, derived best-ﬁtting temperature was aﬀected by the
distance assumption. We constrained the distance to the globules by comparing the temperature
from the molecular line width with the temperature from the Bonnor-Ebert ﬁtting, and rescaled
distance-dependent physical quantities of globules.
(1) We found that more than half of the starless globules (7 out of 11 sources) are located
near the critical state, ξmax = 6.5 ± 2.
Thus, we suggest that a nearly critical Bonnor-Ebert
sphere characterizes the typical density structure of starless globules, and it approximates the
initial condition of gravitational collapse.
(2) We found that four out of eleven starless globules show clearly unstable states (ξmax > 10).
Since unstable equilibrium states should not be long sustained, we expect that they are already
collapsing toward higher central condensation or that extra force (e.g., magnetic and/or turbulent
pressure) accounting for large ξmax stabilizes the globules. It was also found that all three star-
forming globules have unstable solutions of ξmax > 10, which is consistent with the fact that they
have started gravitational collapse.
(3) We investigated the collapse of the Bonnor-Ebert sphere from a nearly critical state using
the model calculation of Aikawa et al.
(2005), and found that the column density proﬁles of
the collapsing sphere mimic those of static Bonnor-Ebert spheres (unstable equilibrium solutions).
By relating ξmax to the collapsing sphere at a speciﬁc time, the evolutionary state of globules
can be interpreted, and the detection probability of each ξmax value can be predicted from the
model calculation. Since the evolutionary timescale decreases with increasing density, the collapsing
sphere resembles a marginally unstable Bonnor-Ebert sphere for a long time. It was found that the
frequency distribution of ξmax for the observed starless globules is consistent with that from model
calculations of the collapsing sphere.


=== PDF PAGE 19 ===
– 19 –
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Masao Saito and Koji Tomisaka for their helpful comments and suggestions.
Thanks are due to the staﬀat SAAO and NRO for their kind support during the observations. We
also thank Doug Johnstone, the referee of this paper, for useful comments on the manuscript. The
IRSF/SIRIUS project was initiated and supported by Nagoya University, National Astronomical
Observatory of Japan, and University of Tokyo in collaboration with South African Astronomical
Observatory under a ﬁnancial support of Grant-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc Research on Priority Area (A)
No. 10147207 and No. 10147214, and Grant-in-Aid No. 13573001 of the Ministry of Education,
Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology of Japan. M. T. acknowledges support by the Grant-
in-Aid (No.
12309010, 16340061, 16077204).
Y. A. is supported by Grant-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc
Research (No. 14740130, 16036205) and “The 21st Century COE Program of Origin and Evolution
of Planetary Systems” of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of
Japan (MEXT).
Appendix A: Possible Systematic Uncertainties in ξmax
Here we discuss the ambiguity of derived column density (AV ), which leads to the systematic
uncertainties in ξmax. In order to evaluate the dependence of the conversion factor, AV /EH−K
and AV /Aλ (λ = J, H, and K), on the ratio of total-to-selective extinction RV , we used the RV -
dependent extinction law empirically derived by Cardelli et al. (1989). Though it is well established
that RV has a uniform value of ∼3.1 in the ISM (e.g., Whittet 1992), there are some observational
reports on higher RV values up to ∼6 in dense molecular clouds (e.g., Kandori et al. 2003, and
references therein). The empirical extinction law for RV = 6 gives the conversion factors smaller
∼20 % than those for the case of RV = 3.1, which we adopted in the analysis (§3.1 and §3.2).
Note that the extinction law gives slightly diﬀerent conversion factors compared with Rieke &
Lebofsky (1985) as shown in Table 3 of Cardelli et al. (1989). This possible systematic uncertainty
as well as the uncertainty of the gas-to-dust ratio can be included in the derivation of N(H2). We
have converted AV to H2 column density using the relationship N(H2)/AV = 9.4 × 1020 cm−2
mag−1 derived from Bohlin, Savage, & Drake (1978). Similar relationships were obtained from
the X-ray absorption studies toward SNRs with high dynamic range (AV <∼30 mag) as NH/AV =
1.8 −2.2 × 1021cm−2mag−1 (Gorenstein 1975; Ryter et al. 1975; Ryter 1996; Predehl & Schmitt
1995). Thus, the conversion coeﬃcient is likely to be determined within ∼20 % error. It can be
seen from the panel (a) of Figure 7 that AV is roughly correlated with about 1/2th power of density
contrast for the Bonnor-Ebert spheres. Thus, for the case that AV is systematically changed by
a factor β, the value of density contrast varies by β1.5 accordingly. Since ξmax is proportional to
√ρc, corresponding ξmax value is expected to vary by β0.75. If we assume that derived AV for
each globule is overestimated by 20 %, ξmax is overestimated by ∼15 %. This is comparable to
the uncertainty in ξmax derived from the χ2 ﬁtting, and this modiﬁcation should not signiﬁcantly
change our conclusions on the density structure of globules.
REFERENCES
Aikawa, Y., Herbst, E., Roberts, H., & Caselli, P., 2005, ApJ, 620, 330


=== PDF PAGE 20 ===
– 20 –
Alves, J. F., Lada, C. J., & Lada E. A., 2001, Nature, 409, 159
Aso, Y., Tatematsu, K., Sekimoto, Y., Nakano, T., Umemoto, T., Koyama, K., & Yamamoto, S.,
ApJS, 131, 465
Bacmann, A., Andr´e, P., Puget, J. -L., Abergel, A., Bontemps, S., & Ward-Thompson, D., 2000,
A&A, 361, 555
Benson, P. J., & Myers, P. C., 1989, ApJS, 71, 89
Bergin, E. A., Alves, J., Huard, T., & Lada, C. J., 2002, ApJ, 570, L101
Bohlin, R. C., Savage, B. D., & Drake, J. F., 1978, ApJ, 224, 132
Bonnor, W. B., 1956, MNRAS, 116, 351
Cambr´esy, L. 1999, A&A, 345, 965
Cardelli, J. A., Clayton, G. C., & Mathis, J. S. 1989, ApJ, 345, 245
Caselli, P., Myers, P. C., & Thaddeus, P., 1995, ApJ, 455, L77
Caselli, P., Benson, P. J., Myers, P. C., & Tafalla, M., 2002, ApJ, 572, 238
Clemens, D. P., & Barvainis, R., 1988, ApJS, 68, 257
Curry, C. L., 2000, ApJ, 541, 831
Cutri, R. M., Skrutskie, M. F., van Dyk, S., Beichman, C. A., Carpenter, J. M., Chester, T.,
Cambr´esy, L., Evans, T., Fowler, J., Gizis, J., Howard, E., Huchra, J., Jarrett, T., Kopan, E.
L., Kirkpatrick, J. D., Light, R. M., Marsh, K. A., McCallon, H., Schneider, S., Stiening, R.,
Sykes, M., Weinberg, M., Wheaton, W. A., Wheelock, S., & Zacarias, N., 2003, CDS/ADC
Collection of Electronic Catalogues, 2246
Dame, T. M., Ungerechts, H., Cohen, R. S., De Geus, E. J., Grenier I. A., May, J., Murphy, D. C.,
Nyman, L. -˚A, & Thaddeus, P., 1987, ApJ, 322, 706
Di Francesco, J., Hogerheijde, M. R., Welch, W. J., & Bergin, E. A., 2002, AJ, 124, 2749
Dickman, R. L. 1978, AJ, 83, 363
Dobashi, K., Uehara, H., Kandori, R., Sakurai, T., Kaiden, M., Umemoto, T., & Sato, F., 2005,
PASJ, 57, 1
Dutra, C. M. & Bica, E., 2002, A&A, 383, 631
Ebert, R., 1955, Zs. Ap., 37, 217
Evans, N. J., II, Rawlings, J. M. C., Shirley, Y., & Mundy, L. G., 2001, ApJ, 557, 193
Foster, P. N. & Chevalier, R. A., 1993, ApJ, 416, 303
Fuller, G. A. & Myers, P. C., 1992, ApJ, 384, 523


=== PDF PAGE 21 ===
– 21 –
Galli, D., Walmsley, M., & Gon¸calves, J., 2002, A&A, 394, 275
Gorenstein, P., 1975, ApJ, 198, 95
Harvey, D. W. A., Wilner, D. J., Lada, C. J., Myers, P. C., Alves, J. F., & Chen, H., 2001, ApJ,
563, 903
Harvey, D. W. A., Wilner, D. J., Lada, C. J., Myers, P. C., & Alves, J. F., 2003, ApJ, 598, 1112
Hennebelle, P., Whitworth, A. P., Gladwin, P. P., & Andr´e, P., 2003, MNRAS, 340, 870
Hennebelle, P., Whitworth, A. P., Cha, S. -H., & Goodwin, S. P., 2004, MNRAS, 348, 687
Hotzel, S., Harju, J., & Juvela, M., 2002a, A&A, 395, L5
Hotzel, S., Harju, J., Juvela, M., Mattila, K., & Haikala, L. K., 2002b, A&A, 391, 275
Hotzel, S., Harju, J., Lemke, D., Mattila, K., & Walmsley, C. M., 2001, A&A, 372, 302
Huard, T. L., Sandell, G., & Weintraub, D. A., 1999, ApJ, 526, 833
Jijina, J., Myers, P. C., & Adams, F. C., 1999, ApJS, 125, 161
Johnstone, D., Fich, M., Mitchell, G. F., & Moriarty-Schieven, G., 2001, ApJ, 559, 307
Kandori, R., Dobashi, K., Uehara, H., Sato, F., & Yanagisawa, K., 2003, AJ, 126, 1888
Lada, C. J., Huard, T. L., Crews, L. J., & Alves, J. F., 2004, ApJ, 610, 303
Lada, C. J., Lada, E. A., Clemens, D. P., & Bally, J. 1994, ApJ, 429, 694
Lai, S., Velusamy, T., Langer, W. D., & Kuiper, T. B. H., 2003, AJ, 126, 311
Larson, R. B., 1969, MNRAS, 145, 271
Larson, R. B., 2003, Reports on Progress in Physics, 66, 1651
Launhardt, R., 1996, Ph.D. Thesis,
Launhardt, R. & Henning, T., 1997, A&A, 326, 329
Launhardt, R., Evans, N. J., II, Wang, Y., Clemens, D. P., Henning, T., & Yun, J. L., 1998, 119,
59
Lee, C. W. & Myers, P. C., 1999, ApJS, 123, 233
Lee, C. W., Myers, P. C., & Tafalla, M., 1999, ApJ, 526, 788
Lee, C. W., Myers, P. C., & Tafalla, M., 2001, ApJS, 136, 703
Lee, C. W., Myers, P. C., & Plume, R., 2004, ApJS, 153, 523
Leung, C. M., Kutner, M. L., & Mead, K. N., 1982, ApJ, 262, 583


=== PDF PAGE 22 ===
– 22 –
McLaughlin, D. E. & Pudritz, R. E., 1997, ApJ, 476, 750
McKee, C. F., 1999, in The origin of stars and planetary systems, ed. Lada, C. J. & Kylaﬁs, N. D.
(Kluwer, NATO Sci. Ser. 540), 29
McKee, C. F., & Holliman, J. H., II., 1999, ApJ, 522, 313
Motoyama, K., & Yoshida, T., 2003, MNRAS, 344, 461
Nakano, T., 1998, ApJ, 494, 587
Nagashima, C., Nagayama, T., Nakajima, Y., Tamura, M., Sugitani, K., Nagata, T., Hirao,
T., Nakaya, H., Yanagisawa, K., & Sato, S., 1999, in Proc. Star Formation 1999, ed. T.
Nakamoto, & Nobeyama Radio Observatory, 397
Nagayama, T., Nagashima, C., Nakajima, Y., Nagata, T., Sato, S., Nakaya, H., Yamamuro, T.,
Sugitani, K., & Tamura, M., 2003, Proc. SPIE, 4841, 459
Nakajima, Y., Kato, D., Nagata, T., Tamura, M., Sato, S., Sugitani, K., Nagashima, C., Nagayama,
T., Iwata, I., Ita, Y., Tanabe, T., Kurita, M., Nakaya, H., & Baba, D., AJ, In press
Ogino, S., Tomisaka, K., & Nakamura, F., 1999, PASJ, 51, 637
Penston, M. V., 1969, MNRAS, 144, 425
Persson, S. E., Murphy, D. C., Krzeminski, W., Roth, M., & Rieke, M. J., 1998, AJ, 116, 2475
Plummer, H. C., 1911, MNRAS, 71, 460
Predehl, P. & Schmitt, J. H. M. M., 1995, A&A, 293, 889
Racca, G., G´omez, M., & Kenyon, S. J., 2002, AJ, 124, 2178
Rieke, G. H. & Lebofsky, M. J., 1985, ApJ, 288, 618
Ryter, C., Cesarsky, C. J., & Audouze, J., 1975, ApJ, 198, 103
Ryter, C. E., 1996, Ap&SS, 236, 285
Schneider, S. & Elmegreen, B. G., 1979, ApJS, 41, 87
Shu, F. H., 1977, ApJ, 214, 488
Stetson, P. B. 1987, PASP, 99, 191
Straizys, V., Cernis, K., & Bartasiute, S., 1996, Baltic Astronomy, 5, 125
Sunada, K., Yamaguchi, C., Nakai, N., Sorai, K., Okumura, S., & Ukita, N., 2000, Proc. SPIE,
4015, 237
Tafalla, M., Myers, P. C., Caselli, P., Walmsley, C. M., & Comito, C. 2002, ApJ, 569, 815
Tatematsu, K., Umemoto, T., Kandori, R., & Sekimoto, Y., 2004, ApJ, 606, 333


=== PDF PAGE 23 ===
– 23 –
Tin´e, S., Roueﬀ, E., Falgarone, E., Gerin, M., & Pineau des Forˆets, G., 2000, A&A, 356, 1039
Visser, A. E., Richer, J. S., & Chandler, C. J., 2001, MNRAS, 323, 257
Visser, A. E., Richer, J. S., & Chandler, C. J., 2002, AJ, 124, 2756
Ward-Thompson, D., Andr´e, P., & Kirk, J. M., 2002, MNRAS, 329, 257
Whittet, D. C. B. 1992, in Dust in the Galactic Environment (NY: Inst. Phys.)
Whitworth, A. P., & Ward-Thompson, D., 2001, ApJ, 547, 317
Wolf, M. 1923, Astron. Nachr., 219, 109
Young, C. H. et al., 2004, ApJS, 154, 396
Yun, J. L. & Clemens, D. P., 1992, ApJ, 385, 21
This preprint was prepared with the AAS LATEX macros v5.0.


=== PDF PAGE 24 ===
– 24 –
Table 1: Source list
Name
R.A. (J2000)a Dec. (J2000)a Distance
IRASb Other name
Referencec
(h m s)
(◦′ ′′)
(pc)
CB 87
17 25 05
−24 07 19
160
No
Barnard 74, Lynds 81
1,2
CB 110
18 05 55
−18 25 10
180
No
Lynds 307
1,3,4
CB 131
19 17 00
−18 01 52
180
No
Barnard 93, Lynds 328
1,3,4
CB 134
18 22 45
−01 42 40
260
No
1,5,A
CB 161
18 53 56
−07 26 29
400
No
Barnard 118, Lynds 509
1,6
CB 184
19 31 52
+16 27 14
300
Nod
Lynds 709
1,3,4
CB 188
19 20 16
+11 36 15
300
Yese
Lynds 673-1
1,3,4
FeSt 1-457
17 35 45
−25 33 11
160
No
1,3,4,B
Lynds 495
18 38 58
−06 44 00
200
No
1,7,C
Lynds 498
18 40 11
−06 40 45
200
No
1,7,C
aPosition of ﬁeld center for each near-infrared image.
bExistence of IRAS point sources within optical boundary of each core.
c(1) Dutra & Bica (2002); (2) Huard, Sandell & Weintraub (1999); (3) Launhardt & Henning (1997); (4) Dame et al. (1987); (5) Straizys, Cernis, & Bartasiute
(1996); (6) Leung, Kutner, & Mead (1982); (7) Schneider, & Elmegreen (1979); (A) Assumed to have the same distance as Serpens molecular cloud; (B) Assumed
to have the same distance as Barnard 83; (C) Assumed to have the same distance as GF 5 dark cloud ﬁlament.
dIRAS 19116+1623 (Class II located near core boundary): Launhardt (1996)
eIRAS 19179+1129 (Class I with outﬂow): Launhardt (1996), Yun, & Clemens (1992)


=== PDF PAGE 25 ===
– 25 –
Table 2: Results of stellar detection
Field
Limiting mag.a
Threshold mag.b
Detected number of starsc
J
H
Ks
J
H
Ks
J
H
Ks
H and Ks
CB 87
18.9
18.4
17.5
18.5
17.8
17.1
8107
10588
6510
7609
CB 110
18.8
17.9
17.1
18.1
17.2
16.4
12471
14220
12340
12119
CB 131
19.1
18.6
17.5
18.1
17.4
16.8
6678
10760
111868
9890
CB 134
19.5
19.2
17.9
18.9
18.5
17.5
5631
7530
4530
5510
CB 161
18.5
18.3
17.3
18.0
17.7
16.9
6431
8406
5330
6044
CB 184
18.8
18.1
17.3
18.3
17.8
17.1
5235
6056
4241
4673
CB 188
18.9
18.3
17.4
18.4
17.6
17.0
6743
8963
7372
7669
FeSt 1-457
19.0
18.2
17.4
18.6
17.2
16.8
9261
10614
10444
9240
Lynds 495
19.1
18.0
16.6
18.4
17.2
15.9
10764
13404
10510
10760
Lynds 498
18.7
17.6
16.7
17.7
16.8
16.0
13826
13696
12064
11673
aLimiting magnitude is deﬁned by the magnitudes whose photometric error is equal to 0.1 mag.
bThreshold magnitude is deﬁned by the peak value of the histogram distribution of magnitudes for detected stars whose magnitude errors are less than 0.1 mag.
cThe ﬁrst three columns show the number of stars detected on the J, H, or Ks images (single band detection) whose photometric error is less than threshold
magnitudes. The last column shows the number of stars detected both on the H and Ks images whose photometric errors,
p
δH2 + δK2
S, are less than 0.15 mag.


=== PDF PAGE 26 ===
– 26 –
Table 3: Molecular line parameters of globules
Name
VLSR
∆V a
∆VNTb
Teﬀc
τ d
Texe
Molecular Line
(km s−1)
(km s−1)
(km s−1)
(K)
(K)
CB 87f
4.73±0.02
0.21±0.04
0.17±0.05
11.4±0.8
0.55±0.12
10
C18O (J = 1 −0)
4.73±0.01
0.25±0.02
0.22±0.03
12.4±0.6
0.38±0.04
10
CB 110
5.94±0.02
0.50±0.04
0.48±0.04
21.8±2.2
0.62±0.06
10
C18O (J = 1 −0)
5.91±0.01
0.45±0.02
0.43±0.02
19.3±1.0
0.47±0.02
10
CB 131
6.66±0.01
0.56±0.02
0.55±0.02
25.1±1.3
0.58±0.03
10
C18O (J = 1 −0)
6.65±0.01
0.57±0.02
0.56±0.02
25.8±1.1
0.56±0.02
10
CB 134
8.56±0.01
0.28±0.02
0.25±0.02
13.2±0.6
0.94±0.10
10
C18O (J = 1 −0)
8.562±0.004
0.24±0.01
0.20±0.01
12.1±0.2
0.81±0.04
10
CB 161
12.48±0.01
0.25±0.02
0.22±0.02
12.5±0.6
0.61±0.06
10
C18O (J = 1 −0)
12.47±0.01
0.27±0.01
0.24±0.02
13.0±0.4
0.44±0.02
10
CB 184
6.10±0.01
0.35±0.02
0.33±0.02
15.5±0.6
1.01±0.08
10
C18O (J = 1 −0)
6.096±0.005
0.35±0.01
0.33±0.01
15.5±0.4
0.88±0.04
10
CB 188
6.98±0.01
0.44±0.03
0.42±0.03
19.0±1.3
0.54±0.04
10
C18O (J = 1 −0)
6.92±0.01
0.52±0.02
0.50±0.02
22.9±1.2
0.37±0.02
10
FeSt 1-457
5.820±0.003
0.182±0.006
0.132±0.009
10.9±0.1
9.56±1.29
6.25±0.21
N2H+ (J = 1 −0)
5.824±0.002
0.175±0.004
0.122±0.005
10.8±0.1
11.48±0.86
5.80±0.09
Lynds 495
12.18±0.10
0.26±0.02
0.22±0.02
12.6±0.6
0.60±0.06
10
C18O (J = 1 −0)
12.18±0.01
0.26±0.01
0.23±0.02
12.7±0.4
0.54±0.03
10
Lynds 498
12.51±0.01
0.18±0.03
0.14±0.04
11.0±0.6
0.41±0.07
10
C18O (J = 1 −0)
12.48±0.01
0.29±0.02
0.27±0.03
13.6±0.7
0.31±0.02
10
aObserved FWHM line width.
bNon-thermal line width. We assumed thermal line width ∆VT is equal to 0.443 km s−1 (Tk = 10 K).
cTemperature including non-thermal (turbulent) contribution (Teﬀ= Tk + TNT).
dPeak optical depth. The value for FeSt 1-457 is the sum of the peak optical depths of the seven hyperﬁne components.
eWe assumed the excitation temperature for the C18O spectra to be 10 K.
fThe ﬁrst row refers to the values from the spectrum toward the center of each globule, and the second row refers to the values from the composite spectrum of the
central nine positions. The error represents 1σ error in the line proﬁle ﬁtting.


=== PDF PAGE 27 ===
– 27 –
Table 4: Physical properties of globules I
Name
R.A. (J2000)a Dec. (J2000)a
θR
ξmax
nc/nedgeb
AV c
ed
P.A.d
rﬁte
χ2
Stabilityf
Referenceg
(h m s)
(◦′ ′′)
(′′)
(mag)
(◦)
(′′)
CB 87
17 24 58.1
−24 06 49
87.5±2.6
5.1±0.4
8.1
6.6
0.52
120
<110
3.19
Stable
A
CB 110
18 05 54.7
−18 25 02
61.1±3.1
14.0±3.0
94.3
19.7
—–
—–
<70
1.17
Unstable
A
CB 131
18 17 00.5
−18 02 05
103±7.4
16.3±5.1
139
32.9
—–
—–
<150
3.22
Unstable
A
CB 134
18 22 46.3
−01 42 50
59.6±4.3
18.5±4.9
187
26.8
—–
—–
<55
0.44
Unstable
A
CB 161
18 53 56.0
−07 26 07
62.5±6.9
8.1±1.4
25.1
13.0
0.72
125
<50
0.11
Unstable
A
CB 184
19 13 51.7
+16 27 27
112±20
8.1±1.6
24.9
11.2
0.68
0
<75
0.15
Unstable
A
CB 188
19 20 15.7
+11 36 07
127±19
16.0±2.9
132
27.2
—–
—–
<100
5.17
Unstable
A
FeSt 1-457
17 35 47.5
−25 32 59
144±11
12.6±2.0
74.5
41.0
—–
—–
<140
1.41
Unstable
A
Lynds 495
18 38 57.4
−06 44 06
75.0±7.8
7.2±1.4
18.6
12.7
—–
—–
<65
0.14
Unstable
A
Lynds 498
18 40 10.5
−06 40 43
75.0±3.0
4.7±0.4
6.63
10.9
—–
—–
<70
0.84
Stable
A
Barnard 68
——–
——–
100
6.9±0.2
16.6
—–
—–
—–
—–
—–
Unstable
B
Barnard 335
19 37 00.9
+07 34 10.0
125
12.5±2.6
73.1
—–
—–
—–
<100
2.93
Unstable
C
Coalsack
12 31 38.6
−63 43 42.5
290
5.8
10.9
11.5
—–
—–
55−400
—–
Stable
D
——–
——–
140
7.0±0.3
17.2
23.0
—–
—–
—–
—–
Unstable
E
Lynds 694-2
19 41 04.4
+10 57 00.9
54
25±3
364
—–
—–
—–
<83
1.12
Unstable
F
aPosition of core center (centroid of AV distribution).
bCenter-to-edge density contrast determined from ξmax value.
cAV at core center.
dFitted ellipticity and position angle.
eProﬁle ﬁtting region in the Bonnor-Ebert ﬁt.
fStability of equilibrium state of the Bonnor-Ebert sphere.
g (A) This work; (B) Alves et al. (2001); (C) Harvey et al. (2001); (D) Lada et al. (2004); (E) Racca et al. (2002); (F) Harvey et al. (2003)


=== PDF PAGE 28 ===
– 28 –
Table 5: Physical properties of globules II
Name
T a
Db
Rc
ncc
Mc
Pextc
Referenced
(K)
(pc)
(AU)
(cm−3)
(M⊙)
(K cm−3)
CB87
6.0±0.4
160
(1.40±0.04)×104
(3.2±0.4)×104
0.76±0.07
(2.9±0.4)×104
A
11.4
304
(2.66±0.08)×104
(1.7±0.2)×104
2.73±0.24
(2.9±0.4)×104
A
CB 110
7.0±0.4
180
(1.10±0.06)×104
(4.5±1.7)×105
0.74±0.17
(4.0±0.9)×104
A
21.8
561
(3.43±0.18)×104
(1.5±0.6)×105
7.21±1.64
(4.0±0.9)×104
A
CB 131
14.0±0.8
180
(1.85±0.13)×104
(4.4±2.3)×105
2.43±0.73
(5.3±1.5)×104
A
25.1
323
(3.32±0.24)×104
(2.5±1.3)×105
7.83±2.35
(5.3±1.5)×104
A
CB 134
13.0±0.8
260
(1.55±0.11)×104
(7.6±3.4)×105
1.85±0.50
(6.3±1.7)×104
A
13.2
264
(1.57±0.11)×104
(7.5±3.3)×105
1.91±0.52
(6.3±1.7)×104
A
CB 161
14.0±1.1
400
(2.50±0.28)×104
(6.1±1.4)×104
3.51±0.90
(4.0±1.5)×104
A
12.5
357
(2.23±0.25)×104
(7.0±1.6)×104
2.79±0.72
(4.0±1.5)×104
A
CB 184
14.0±1.0
300
(3.35±0.61)×104
(3.4±0.5)×104
4.70±1.76
(2.2±1.6)×104
A
15.5
332
(3.71±0.67)×104
(3.0±0.4)×104
5.76±2.17
(2.2±1.6)×104
A
CB 188
18.0±1.1
300
(3.80±0.57)×104
(1.3±0.3)×105
6.45±2.05
(2.1±1.1)×104
A
19.0
317
(4.01±0.60)×104
(1.2±0.2)×105
7.19±2.28
(2.1±1.1)×104
A
FeSt 1-457
24.0±1.7
160
(2.30±0.18)×104
(2.9±0.8)×105
5.41±1.13
(1.1±0.3)×105
A
10.9
73
(1.04±0.08)×104
(6.5±1.7)×105
1.12±0.23
(1.1±0.3)×105
A
Lynds 495
8.0±0.7
200
(1.50±0.16)×104
(7.6±2.1)×104
1.19±0.31
(3.9±1.4)×104
A
12.6
315
(2.36±0.25)×104
(4.8±1.4)×104
2.95±0.77
(3.9±1.4)×104
A
Lynds 498
11.0±0.9
200
(1.50±0.06)×104
(4.3±0.5)×104
1.42±0.16
(8.5±1.7)×104
A
11.0
200
(1.50±0.06)×104
(4.3±0.5)×104
1.42±0.16
(8.5±1.7)×104
A
Barnard 68
16
125
1.25×104
——–
2.10
1.8×105
B
10±1.2
85
0.85×104
——–
0.90
1.7×105
G
Barnard 335
——–
250
3.125×104
3.0×104
14.0
——–
C
Coalsack
19
150
4.35×104
1.8×104
6.1±0.5
——–
D
15
180
2.52×104
5.4×104
4.50
6.5×104
E
Lynds 694-2
——–
250
1.35×104
3.1×105
3.00
1.1×105
F
aFirst row: value from the Bonnor-Ebert ﬁt using assumed distance to the globules (see Table 1), Second row: value
from molecular line observations (Teﬀ; see, Table 3).
b First row: same value as listed in Table 1, Second row: calibrated value by using Teﬀto scale the ﬁtted Bonnor-Ebert
model parameters (see, §4.2.2).
c The values in the ﬁrst and second rows are derived using the distances listed in the third column.
d (A) This work; (B)-(F) Same references as those in Table 4; (G) Hotzel et al. (2002a).


=== PDF PAGE 29 ===
– 29 –
Fig. 1.— J, H, and Ks three-color composite images for ten Bok globules (J: blue, H: green, Ks:
red). Each image size is 930×930 pixel (∼7 arcminutes). North is up, and east is toward the left.


=== PDF PAGE 30 ===
– 30 –
Fig. 2.— AV distribution for Bok globules. The area enclosed by the broken line is the reference
ﬁeld expected to be free from dust extinction, and the area enclosed by the dotted line is the masked
region which is excluded in the derivation of the radial AV proﬁle.


=== PDF PAGE 31 ===
– 31 –
Fig. 2.— continued.


=== PDF PAGE 32 ===
– 32 –
Fig. 3.— Line proﬁles toward the center of ten globules (N2H+ for FeSt 1-457, C18O for the other
globules). The gray solid line denotes ﬁtting result of each spectrum.


=== PDF PAGE 33 ===
– 33 –
Fig. 4.— Radial column density proﬁle and the Bonnor-Ebert model ﬁt for the ten Bok globules.
The dots and error bars represent the average N(H2) values at each annulus arranged at intervals
of 9′′ and the rms dispersion of data points in each annulus, respectively. The solid line denotes
the best-ﬁt Bonnor-Ebert proﬁle which is convolved to the observing resolution (typically ∼30′′)
with the same beam as used in the AV measurements. The dashed line denotes the Bonnor-Ebert
proﬁle before the convolution. The gray dot-dashed line denotes the 1 σ deviation of the column
density measured in the reference ﬁeld.


=== PDF PAGE 34 ===
– 34 –
Fig. 4.— continued.


=== PDF PAGE 35 ===
– 35 –
Fig.
5.— The solid line shows the relation between ξmax and density contrast (center-to-edge
density ratio). The location of our 10 globules and previously reported 4 globules (Barnard 335,
Harvey et al. 2001; Barnard 68, Alves et al. 2001; Coalsack Globule II, Racca et al. 2002; Lada et
al. 2004; Lynds 694-2, Harvey et al. 2003) are shown in the ﬁgure. Filled and open black circles
denote starless and star-forming globules, respectively. Filled gray circles denote the ﬁtting results
when the masked region on the AV map (see Fig. 2) is included in the derivation of the column
density proﬁle. The vertical dashed line denotes critical state of ξmax= 6.5. In the lower panel of
the ﬁgure, horizontal error bars denote 1σ error in the χ2 density proﬁle ﬁtting.


=== PDF PAGE 36 ===
– 36 –
Fig. 6.— Histograms of logarithmic density contrast for starless and star-forming globules. The
vertical broken line denotes the density contrast of the critical Bonnor-Ebert sphere.


=== PDF PAGE 37 ===
– 37 –
Fig. 7.— Correlations between density contrast and the other physical parameters. The panels of
(a) to (f) show the correlation diagrams for AV , central density, radius, mass, temperature, and
external pressure, respectively. Filled and open circles denote starless and star-forming globules,
respectively. The vertical gray line denotes the density contrast of the critical Bonnor-Ebert sphere.
The plotted data points are the physical quantities after distance-correction (see, §4.2.2, Table 5).
The physical quantities without distance-correction are shown as the symbol “−” in each panel. The
broken lines represent the relationships for the Bonnor-Ebert spheres with a constant temperature
Teﬀof 13.2 K and Pext of 5.3 × 104 K cm−3.


=== PDF PAGE 38 ===
– 38 –
Fig. 8.— Radial column density distribution of a collapsing gas sphere at some speciﬁc times (black
solid, dotted, and broken line) started from the initial condition of a nearly critical Bonnor-Ebert
density structure (gray solid line). Dotted and broken lines are shifted by 5 and 10 (1021 cm−2) in
the ﬁgure, respectively. Best-ﬁt solution of the Bonnor-Ebert sphere for each line is also plotted as
plus symbol.


=== PDF PAGE 39 ===
– 39 –
Fig. 9.— The solid line shows the relation between ξmax and density contrast for the Bonnor-Ebert
sphere (same as Fig. 5). The dotted line denotes the similar relation for a collapsing sphere starting
from a nearly critical Bonnor-Ebert sphere (α = 1.1 model; Aikawa et al. 2004); the column density
proﬁles of the collapsing sphere were ﬁtted with static Bonnor-Ebert sphere solutions, and the best-
ﬁt ξmax values are plotted against the density contrast values of the collapsing sphere. The plus
symbols denote the elapsed times from the onset of collapse at 10% intervals of the total collapse
time (tcol).


=== PDF PAGE 40 ===
– 40 –
Fig. 10.— The histogram of the logarithmic density contrast for starless globules (the same as
Figure 6). The solid line with dots shows the time evolution of the model collapsing sphere; each
dot represents the residence time of a collapsing sphere measured at 0.2 intervals in the logarithmic
density contrast. The vertical axis on the right side shows the percentage of the residence time
with respect to the total collapse time.
