
=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
arXiv:astro-ph/0701803v1  29 Jan 2007
Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 000, 1–8 (2006)
Printed 30 October 2018
(MN LATEX style ﬁle v2.2)
Accretion disc viscosity: how big is alpha?
A. R. King1, J.E. Pringle1,2,3 and M. Livio3
1Theoretical Astrophysics Group, University of Leicester, Leicester LE1 7RH
2Institute of Astronomy, University of Cambridge, Madingley Road, Cambridge CB3 0HA
3Space Telescope Science Institute, 3700 San Martin Drive, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
30 October 2018
ABSTRACT
We consider observational and theoretical estimates of the accretion disc viscosity
parameter α. We ﬁnd that in thin, fully-ionized discs, the best observational evidence
suggests a typical range α ∼0.1 −0.4, whereas the relevant numerical simulations
tend to derive estimates for α which are an order of magnitude smaller. We discuss
possible reasons for this apparent discrepancy.
Key words: accretion, accretion discs
1
INTRODUCTION
Accretion discs are believed to be present in a wide variety
of astronomical systems, and have been a major research
topic for several decades (see e.g. Pringle, 1981 and Frank,
King & Raine, 2002). For much of this time theorists have
had problems understanding the fundamental driving mech-
anism transporting angular momentum outwards and thus
allowing matter to spiral inwards in a disc. This mechanism
is usually called ‘viscosity’, and appears in virtually all of
disc theory. Ideas about discs nevertheless gained credibil-
ity because of two factors. The ﬁrst was that the radial
distribution of eﬀective temperature across a steady disc
(T (R) ∝R−3/4) is independent of the viscosity, being just
a statement of energy conservation, and is in reasonable ac-
cord with both continuum spectra and eclipse mapping of
cataclysmic variables (CVs). These are close binary systems
where a white dwarf accretes from a low–mass companion
via a disc. The second was the devising of a physically–
motivated, dimensionless scaling of the kinematic viscosity
ν as
ν = αcsH
(1)
(Shakura & Sunyaev, 1973). Here cs is the local mean sound
speed in the disc, and H ∼(cs/vφ)R is the scaleheight per-
pendicular to the disc plane at radius R, where vφ is the
azimuthal velocity. In a thin disc (i.e. one with cooling eﬃ-
cient enough that H ≪R) where the velocity vφ is very close
to the Kepler value vK = (GM/R)1/2 (where M is the ac-
creting central mass), these quantities are well–deﬁned, so α
is a dimensionless quantity specifying the local rate at which
angular momentum (strictly speaking, that component or-
thogonal to the disc plane) is transported. The parameter α
is a quantity whose properties are to be determined experi-
mentally. 1
This alpha–prescription allows formal closure of the sys-
tem of equations describing a thin disc, even though there is
no presumption that α is anything other than an unknown
dimensionless scaling variable, although it is often assumed
to be a constant. Gratifyingly, many of the properties of
steady thin discs turn out to have rather weak dependences
on α. Ignorance of the physical properties or strength of
the angular momentum transport process, represented in
dimensionless fashion by α, is thus much less of an obsta-
cle to practical application of this simple picture than one
might suppose. The perceived success of these applications
amounts to noting that fairly similar values of α appear to
give reasonable agreement with observations of many sys-
tems.
A physically plausible theory of the underlying causes
of disc ‘viscosity’ has emerged over the last ﬁfteen years. In
their seminal paper Shakura & Sunyaev (1973) argued that
magnetic ﬁelds are the likely way in which a shearing disc
ﬂow transports angular momentum from rapidly–rotating
ﬂuid to more slowly–rotating ﬂuid further out. This concept
was given impetus with the realization (Balbus & Hawley,
1991) that what is now called the magnetorotational insta-
bility (MRI) can provide the necessary feedback to maintain
a magnetic dynamo in accretion discs. The MRI forms the
basis of all current theoretical simulations of this process.
These have not yet reached the point where direct com-
parison with observation is possible, in terms for example
of being able to predict the spectrum of radiation emitted
1 It is important to realise that α is a mean quantity, averaged
perpendicular to the disc plane. It is well-deﬁned only if the disc
is thin, i.e. H ≪R. In a thick disc, with H ∼R, α has no clear
meaning


=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
2
A. R. King, J. E. Pringle & M. Livio
by accretion discs. Instead the main reason for optimism
has been the belief that these simulations do demonstrate
the feasibility of a self-maintaining process which transports
angular momentum in the required manner.
The point we wish to address in this paper is that it
is also often assumed that numerical simulations produce
formal values of α which agree with those inferred from ob-
servation. The purpose of this paper is to examine how far
this is true. In Section 2 we discuss those astronomical phe-
nomena which give the strongest observational evidence for
the value of α. These are time-dependent discs involved in
the outbursts of dwarf novae and of the X-ray transients.
The discs in these systems are fully ionized, because of the
nature of the outburst mechanism, and so correspond closely
to the the majority of the numerical simulations which con-
sider full MHD. For cooler discs which are not suﬃciently
ionized so that the magnetic ﬁeld is not tied strongly enough
to the disc gas, the MRI is likely to be less vigorous or even
non-operative, so reducing the expected value of α (Gam-
mie, 1996). In Section 3 we discuss the estimates of the value
of α derived from numerical simulations. We concentrate on
those simulations which do not impose an external seed ﬁeld
threading the whole disc to drive the MRI, as neither in the
dwarf novae nor in the X-ray transients is there a plausi-
ble source for such a global ﬁeld. We note that the most
recent computations obtain values of α smaller than those
required by observations by at least an order of magnitude,
and often more. In Section 4 we discuss the limitations under
which numerical simulations of accretion discs have to oper-
ate, driven both by the speed of current computers and the
nature of the numerical algorithms, especially the bound-
ary conditions. We point out that most of the limitations
are likely to act in the direction of reducing α. In Section 5
we discuss the possibility that the ﬁelds generated by accre-
tion discs are more global than can be easily accommodated
in current numerical simulations, together with the possible
consequences of, and complications arising from, the pres-
ence such global ﬁelds.
2
OBSERVED CONSTRAINTS ON ALPHA
Since α is a dimensionless measure of the viscosity2 its
properties need to be determined from observations. We be-
gin therefore by considering observationally determined es-
timates of α. Since as we remarked above, steady thin disc
theory has only a fairly weak dependence on α, by far the
most reliable and direct way of estimating this quantity is
to consider time–dependent disc behaviour. The size of α is
directly proportional to the rate at which angular momen-
tum is transported within the disc, and so is directly related
to the timescale on which a disc can evolve. We note that
even so it is not possible to determine detailed properties
of α, for example how α might depend on radius, or H/R.
Thus the observed values of α correspond to some appro-
priate mean value over the disc being modeled, presumably
2 Note that α is not a measure of an isotropic viscosity as appears,
for example, in the Navier-Stokes equation, but is, rather, strictly
only a measure of the vertically averaged ratio between the (R, φ)-
components of the stress and the rate of strain tensors.
weighted towards larger radii where the viscous timescales
are longest.
2.1
Dwarf nova outbursts
The largest body of evidence here comes from the light
curves of dwarf novae, which are a subclass of cataclysmic
variables (CVs) which undergo outbursts at irregular inter-
vals (Warner, 2003). There is now general agreement that
these outbursts result from the presence of ionization zones
within the disc, allowing this to switch between a cool, low-
ionization, low–viscosity state, and a hot, highly ionized,
high–viscosity state (see Lasota, 2001 for a recent review).
In the hot state the disc evolves on the viscous timescale
tvisc ∼R2
ν
(2)
for a time, before a cooling front propagates through the
disc and returns it to the cool state. The initial slow decay
of the outburst thus allows estimates of α in this hot state.
Estimates of α can therefore be obtained from theoretical
modelling of the outburst lightcurves. Since the disc sizes
are known from the system properties, and since the disc
temperatures are known from the spectra thus determining
H/R, observation of the evolution timescale of the outbursts
gives a reasonably well-determined estimate of the viscous
timescale and hence of α.
Smak (1999) considers the observed relation (Bailey,
1975) between the decay rate and the orbital period. Since
the latter largely ﬁxes the orbital separation and thus the
disc size R, the decay rate measures α directly through (2).
Other estimates (Smak, 1998, 1999) use the delay between
the peak of the outburst in the optical and the UV, which
results from the disc closing a small central hole around the
white dwarf on a viscous timescale tvisc. These estimates
come from the collective properties of a large sample of
dwarf novae. Other estimates use detailed observations of
the outburst light curves of individual systems (Schreiber et
al., 2003, 2004 [SS Cyg and VW Hyi]; Cannizzo 2001a [VW
Hyi, U Gem and SS Cyg]; Cannizzo 2001b [WZ Sge]; Buat–
M´enard et al., 2001 [Z Cam]). All of these papers agree that
α must lie in a fairly narrow range α ≃0.1 −0.3.
2.2
Outbursts of X-ray transients
A second class of accreting binaries that have outbursts is
that of the soft X–ray transients (SXTs) in which the accre-
tor is a black hole or neutron star rather than a white dwarf
as in CVs (Lewin & van der Klis, 2006). Even for similar
orbital parameters, SXT outbursts are considerably longer
than those of dwarf novae (months rather than days), and
have a diﬀerent lightcurve shape (exponential for short or-
bital periods). This at ﬁrst presented a challenge to theory.
There were initial attempts to explain this by devising dif-
ferent ad hoc forms of viscosity (for example setting α to be
a function of H/R; Cannizzo, Chen & Livio, 1995). How-
ever observations show that the discs in SXTs (and indeed
in all low–mass X–ray binaries) are optically much brighter
than expected on the basis of the accretion rate revealed
by their X–ray luminosities. This extra light can be directly
attributed to irradiation of the outer parts of the disc by
some of the central X–rays (van Paradijs & McClintock,


=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
Accretion disc viscosity: how big is alpha?
3
1994). King & Ritter (1998) pointed out that this would
force most of the disc to remain in the hot, high–viscosity
state until a signiﬁcant fraction of the disc mass had accreted
on to the central black hole/neutron star. This explained
the longer duration of SXT outbursts compared with dwarf
novae, and indeed their exponential shape at short orbital
periods (where the whole of the disc can be eﬃciently irradi-
ated). Under the assumption of eﬃcient irradiation Dubus
et al. (2001) made detailed models of complete SXT light
curves and found α ≃0.2 −0.4.
2.3
Other systems which yield estimates of α
2.3.1
Variability in AGN
A somewhat more indirect method of estimating α is sug-
gested by Starling et al. (2004) who look at the optical
variability of active galactic nuclei (AGN) on timescales of
months to years. Starling et al. (2004) measure a two–folding
timescale, deﬁned as the timescale over which the optical lu-
minosity changes by a factor of two. They assume that the
optical emission is generated in a standard, fully ionized,
thin disc, and that the two–folding timescale is given by
disc’s local thermal timescale (Pringle, 1981)
tth ∼1
α

R
vK

.
(3)
They ﬁnd that 0.01 ≤α ≤0.03 for 0.1 ≤L/LE ≤1. Star-
ling et al. note that these values of α are really lower limits
because data sampling means that they might miss shorter
timescales.
2.3.2
Protostellar accretion discs
Young pre-main sequence stars are often surrounded by ac-
cretion discs (e.g. Hartmann, 1998). Estimates of the life-
times of these discs can be obtained by comparing disc fre-
quencies among stars of diﬀerent ages. Estimates for α in
protostellar (T Tauri) discs, based on evolutionary lifetimes,
are given by Hartmann et al. (1998). They give estimates of
α ≈0.01 at disc radii R ∼10 −100 AU. All of the exam-
ples discussed in Sections 2.1 and 2.2 involve accretion discs
which are suﬃciently hot that they are fully ionized. How-
ever, at such large radii the protostellar discs are cool enough
that they are unlikely to be fully ionized. If the ionization
fraction is suﬃciently low the numerical MHD simulations
are not strictly applicable and the MRI which is thought
to drive the viscosity mechanism is signiﬁcantly suppressed
(Gammie, 1996).
2.3.3
FU Orionis outbursts
Models for the outbursts of the pre-main sequence FU Ori-
onis stars in terms of thermally driven disc outbursts of
the kind seen in CVs and SXTs are given by Clarke et al.
(1990), Bell & Lin (1994), and Lodato & Clarke (2004). In
order to ﬁt the timescales of the outbursts the models re-
quire α ≃0.001 −0.003. These values are signiﬁcantly lower
those required for discs undergoing physically analogous out-
bursts in the binary systems, although the outbursts in FU
Ori systems seem to need to be mediated by the presence of
a planet (Lodato & Clarke, 2004). Thus, either there is some
subtlety at work here, or the thermal disc outburst model for
FU Ori outbursts does not work. In this regard we note that
other possibilities for causing FU Ori outbursts have indeed
been discussed, such as a collision of a protostar and disc
with another star (cf. Bonnell & Bastien, 1992; Reipurth &
Aspin, 2004).
2.4
Summary
We conclude that in the most clear cut cases there appears to
be strong observational evidence that values of α = 0.1−0.4
are required to provide a good description of the behaviour
of fully-ionized, thin accretion discs.
3
THEORETICAL ESTIMATES FROM
NUMERICAL SIMULATIONS
Since the work of Balbus & Hawley (1991) there has been a
large number of publications investigating the properties of
the MRI and its relevance to viscosity in accretion discs.
Theoretical simulations of disc viscosity come in two
ﬂavours – those which assume a superimposed seed net
poloidal ﬁeld, and those which do not. Hawley, Gammie &
Balbus (1995) showed that simulations with a superimposed
net Bz tend to yield estimates of α larger by an order of
magnitude than those which do not. They also found that
the value of α produced depended almost linearly on the
magnitude of the externally imposed Bz. Those simulations
which do not have an externally imposed Bz mostly start
with either a small seed toroidal ﬁeld, or alternate regions
of positive and negative vertical ﬁeld Bz.
It seems to us an unlikely proposition that each disc
is subject to a superimposed, immovable, net poloidal ﬁeld
component, of exactly the right magnitude to give rise to the
α in the right range. For a typical dwarf nova in outburst
we ﬁnd the equipartion ﬁeld in the outer disc regions to be
(Shakura & Sunyaev, 1973; Frank, King & Raine, 2002)
Beq ≃5.2 × 104  α
0.1
−9/10 
˙M
1018g/s
17/40 
M
M⊙
7/16
×

R
1010cm
−21/16
G.
(4)
Here ˙M is the accretion rate, M the mass of the central white
dwarf, and R the disc radius, with typical values assumed.
In these numerical simulations, assumed values of βz (here
βz = 8πP/B2
z, where P is the pressure) in the plane of the
disc are in the range 25 – 400. This implies typical vertical
ﬁelds in the range Bz ≃0.05 – 0.2 Beq. For a dwarf nova
in outburst this corresponds to ﬁelds of several hundred to
several thousand Gauss. There seems no obvious source for
ﬁelds of such a magnitude on such a global scale. Moreover, a
vertical global ﬁeld threading a disc can be expected to give
rise to a wind or jet from the disc (Lovelace, Romanova &
Contopoulos, 1992; Pelletier & Pudritz, 1992) and a rough
estimate of the mass loss of such a jet/wind is given by
Pringle (1993) as
˙Mjet
˙M
∼R
H β−1
z α−1.
(5)


=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
4
A. R. King, J. E. Pringle & M. Livio
For typical values of α ∼0.1 and H/R ∼1/30 it is evident
that the typically assumed values of the globally imposed
ﬁeld would be able to generate wind mass losses comparable
to the disc accretion rates.
In view of all this it seems sensible to assume that the
numerical simulations most likely to correspond to physical
reality are those with no net poloidal ﬁeld. In the following
we consider some representative simulations. These all use
full MHD, and thus correspond to fully ionized discs.
Early simulations were carried out by Stone et al. (1996)
who consider a shearing box, with vertical structure conﬁned
within −2H < z < 2H. They adopt periodic boundary con-
ditions in the vertical direction, essentially for numerical rea-
sons. In these simulations the seed ﬁelds either have zero net
vertical ﬁeld or are purely poloidal, and α is deﬁned as the
time and volume averaged stress, normalized to the initial
mid-plane pressure. The measured α is stated as < 0.01 for
most of the simulations. At about the same time, Branden-
burg et al. (1995) also considered a shearing box, but now
with magnetic ﬁeld kept vertical at the z-boundaries, though
with zero net vertical ﬂux. They found 0.001 < α < 0.005.
More recent work gives rise to similar values. For exam-
ple, Sano et al. (2004) consider a shearing box with vertical
periodic boundary conditions and no vertical gravity and
examine the dependence of the saturation level of the MRI
on gas pressure. For simulations with no net vertical ﬂux
they ﬁnd 5 × 10−5 < α < 0.01, with an average value of
α = 0.001.
Miller & Stone (2000) consider a shearing box with ver-
tical gravity and extend the computational domain to ±5H
in the vertical direction. They ﬁnd that the regions away
from the disc plane are strongly magnetic, with β as low as
around 0.02, and term this region a ‘corona’. This coronal
region is however quite unlike the solar corona, or stellar
coronas, in that the ﬁeld is quiescent (being strong enough
to stabilise the MRI) and is well ordered, being predom-
inantly toroidal. They ﬁnd typically that α ∼0.02. This
work is extended by Hirose, Krolik & Stone (2005) who
study the vertical structure of gas pressure dominated accre-
tion discs with local dissipation of turbulence and radiative
transport. They have a shearing box, with vertical gravity,
and −8H < z < 8H. They ﬁnd a similar disc structure with
magnetically strong regions (‘coronas’) at large |z|, and ob-
tain α ≃0.016.
Other workers have needed to move away from the
shearing box approximation and to consider more radially
extended computational domains. Winters et al. (2003) in-
vestigate gap formation by planets in turbulent protostellar
discs. They use full MHD and thus study fully ionized discs.
They consider a cylindrical annulus 0.25 < R/R∗< 3.75
and a vertical grid −2H < z/R∗< 2H, and before adding
a planet they establish a background ﬂow. They do not use
an initial vertical ﬁeld as this is known to produce a series of
evacuated gaps in the disc (Steinacker & Papaloizou 2002;
Nelson & Papaloizou 2003). They use an initial seed toroidal
ﬁeld, and their vertical boundary conditions are periodic.
They quote a global average value of α = 0.02.
Nelson (2005) studies the orbital evolution of low mass
protoplanets in turbulent, magnetized discs. There is no z–
dependence, and he uses vertically periodic boundaries and
a toroidal seed ﬁeld. The grid is cylindrical with 1 < R/R∗<
5, −0.14 < z/R∗< 0.14. The volume averaged stress param-
eter α is found to be ≃0.005 throughout the simulation.
A discrepant note is set by Hawley & Krolik (2001)
who ﬁnd a value of α ∼0.1 (their Fig 13) for radii R/Rs ≤
30. They perform a global simulation of a disc around a
pseudo–Newtonian black hole. They start with a torus at
R = 30Rs (with Rs being the Schwarzschild radius). The
grid is in (R, φ, z) coordinates, with −10 < z/Rs < 10. The
transverse magnetic ﬁeld components are set to zero outside
the computational domain. The initial ﬁeld is poloidal along
equal density contours, which in eﬀect implies that there is
a net Bz through the inner half torus R/Rs ≤30 (and a net
Bz of opposite sign through the outer half). The simulations
ran for t = 1500 (in units with GM = Rs = 1), which is
about 7 orbits at R/Rs = 10. Thus it seems likely that the
initial global poloidal seed ﬁeld is still present throughout
the computation, in which case it is not surprising that the
resulting value of α corresponds more closely to those found
in shearing box runs which have a superimposed seed Bz.
It is apparent therefore that, except perhaps for those of
Hawley & Krolik (2001), theoretical simulations relevant to
fully-ionized discs with no imposed vertical magnetic ﬁeld all
produce values of α <∼0.02, and often considerably smaller.
4
THEORETICAL LIMITATIONS
The general result in need of explanation is that for fully
ionized discs, ﬁtting the observations appears to require
α ∼0.1 −0.4, whereas simulations consistently yield values
which are an order of magnitude, or more, below this value.
This also implies that the simulations have much smaller
magnetic ﬁelds than are actually present, so that disc struc-
tures and dissipation patterns, as well as timescales, are not
being simulated correctly. This could be the reason why sim-
ple atmosphere models are unable to ﬁt the observed spectra
of CV discs in outburst, especially the lack of Balmer jumps,
and the ultraviolet continuum (e.g. Wade, 1984). We must
therefore ask whether the simulations are missing some es-
sential ingredient. We consider various possibilities in turn.
4.1
Restrictions of scale
Shearing box simulations miss out on low values of azimuthal
wavenumber m. This is because the azimuthal box size is
typically around 2πH, and so these simulations can only
handle m = 0, R/H, 2R/H, 3R/H, .... Of course R/H is not
actually deﬁned for the simulations, as in eﬀect the limit
R →∞is required for the box to be Cartesian. But the
magnetic structures which generally emerge have structures
up to and including the box size (see Figure 16 of Hirose,
Krolik and Stone 2005).
The net result of this is striking. The global 3D simula-
tions by Hirose, Krolik and De Villiers (2004) deal with the
evolution of a (quite thick) torus. This is close to a black
hole and so not in any sort of equilibrium. Looking at the
ﬁeld structure we see in Figure 6 that just above the disc (in
the region called the corona) the ﬁeld is strongly azimuthal.
And indeed in the body of the disc, all m values are clearly
present, with most of the power at low values of m. Thus the
main eﬀect of a small box is to eliminate the possibility of


=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
Accretion disc viscosity: how big is alpha?
5
large–scale ﬁeld structures, and thus transmission of power
in the spatial spectrum to low values of m.
Similar considerations apply also on radial scales. In
Figure 5 of Hirose et al (2004) we see that large–scale mag-
netic linkages can occur in the radial direction. Thus shear-
ing boxes prohibit the generation of large–scale magnetic
structures either by inverse cascade (Pringle and Tout, 1996)
or by footpoint twisting (Lynden-Bell, 2003). It may be sig-
niﬁcant that the one computation that looked at 3D global
simulations (Hawley and Krolik, 2001) did appear to get a
larger value of α. It is diﬃcult to be conclusive here, since as
we remarked above the simulation probably still contained
a net poloidal ﬁeld in the relevant region.
We note further that the full disc computations of Win-
ters et al. (2003) and of Nelson (2005) are not restricted
to low m, but do restrict the vertical structure (periodic
boundary conditions vertically, and Nelson has no vertical
gravity). From this we can conclude that simply allowing all
azimuthal values of m to be present does not by itself solve
the problem.
4.2
Boundary conditions
Shearing box simulations have periodic azimuthal and radial
boundary conditions. The radial one is phase–shifted to take
account of the shear, which is acceptable within the limita-
tions discussed above, although it should perhaps be noted
that the radial force is discontinuous at the radial bound-
aries. The calculations of Armitage (1998), however, which
model a radially extended disc with no vertical structure,
but with a vertically imposed ﬁeld, suggest the shearing box
assumption might also have a signiﬁcant eﬀect by restricting
the scale of the ﬁeld in the radial direction.
However, the vertical boundary condition poses quite
a diﬀerent problem for attempts to represent the relevant
physics realistically. Usually for the shearing box this too
is taken to be periodic (implying a stack of accretion discs,
rather like an old juke box). This prevents magnetic ﬂux
from escaping. Another approach (e.g. Brandenburg et al.,
1995) assumes that the ﬁeld is kept vertical at the boundary,
and so again one cannot have ﬂux loops escaping. Thus in
general the vertical boundary conditions serve to suppress
magnetic buoyancy and Parker–type instabilities.
Stone et al (1996) describe early attempts to use free
boundaries, and their attendant diﬃculties: they write “In
principle, free boundaries that do not inhibit outgoing waves
or mass motions would be the most appropriate for model-
ing an astrophysical accretion disk. However, we have en-
countered numerical diﬃculties when strong (β < 1) highly
tangled ﬁelds are advected across free boundaries. When
a strong ﬂux loop begins to cross the boundary, the tip
is ‘snipped’ oﬀ, releasing the two ends. Magnetic tension
forces which previously conﬁned the loop are now unbal-
anced, and the ends of the loop ‘snap’ straight, imparting
a large Lorentz force to the ﬂuid near the boundary. These
forces can produce ﬂuid motions that disrupt the entire disk.
Since strong, highly tangled ﬁelds are an unavoidable con-
sequence of the nonlinear evolution of the instability, we
have found that free outﬂowing boundaries cannot be used
to study the long-term evolution of disks. Instead, for most
of the simulations described in this paper we adopt peri-
odic boundary conditions in the vertical direction. In prac-
tice, periodic boundary conditions act much like rigid walls
in that there can be no net loss of mass or magnetic ﬂux
through them.” An attempt at circumventing this problem
was made by Miller & Stone (2000) in order to deal with
the strongly magnetic disc regions close to the boundary. In
order to reduce the limitations of the Courant condition in
regions where the Alfv´en speed, vA becomes unacceptably
large they introduced the concept of an Alfv´en speed lim-
iter. This limitation is eﬀected in practice by increasing the
momentum density of the ﬂuid by a factor [1+v2
A/c2
lim]. This
implies, of course, that not all the conservation properties of
the MHD equations can be retained. Hirose et al. (2006) face
similar problems which they address by imposing a density
ﬂoor and by imposing a velocity cap of around 30 times the
gas sound speed on the disc midplane. They have an outﬂow
boundary condition, and in line with the comments of Stone
et al., they note that it needs careful handling to ensure sta-
bility. They also add a diﬀusivity in the ghost cells, and note
that the sign of the Poynting ﬂux across the boundary is not
restricted.
Fromang and Nelson (2006) present global 3D models.
Their radial extent is a factor of 8, and their azimuthal
extent an angle π/4 (thus only m = 0, 8, 16, 24, 32, ... are
present). Their vertical extent is 0.3 – 0.4 times the inner
radius, with at most 25 grid cells per vertical scale height.
They have H/R = 0.07 −0.1. They use both outﬂow and
periodic vertical boundary conditions. They comment that
the latter is less physical, but has the advantage of preserv-
ing the total ﬂux of the magnetic ﬁeld and the vanishing of
its divergence, which is evidently diﬃcult to ensure with the
outﬂow condition. For the latter they use the approaches of
Miller and Stone (2000). During the simulation the upper
layers of the disc develop very strong ﬁelds, forcing them
to use an ‘Alfv´en speed limiter’. This seems to indicate that
ﬂux is trapped by the boundary conditions. Indeed they ﬁnd
(their Section 4) that the ﬁnal states of the magnetic corona
are the same for both sets of boundary conditions. In line
with other work they ﬁnd an average eﬀective α = 0.004.
4.3
Convergence of the simulations
Many papers on the application of MRI to accretion discs
often do not include an explicit magnetic diﬀusivity and
so allow numerical diﬀusivity (at the size of the grid cells)
to provide the small scale limit for the turbulence process.
Thus the saturation level of the turbulence (and therefore
the value of α) depends on the grid size. Most interesting
here is the paper by Sano et al (2004) who ﬁnd that the
saturation level of the MRI turbulence depends on the gas
pressure in the (shearing) box. However, since all simulations
ﬁnd similar (too small) values for α, it seems unlikely that
convergence is a major issue.
There is a possible problem here however. In hydrody-
namic turbulence, we are used to thinking that the details
at the smallest scales do not greatly aﬀect the behaviour at
large scales, where transport properties such as the Reynolds
stress are determined. But it is not clear that this is true for
MHD turbulence. Schekochihin et al. (2004, 2005) discuss
this mainly for the interstellar medium. They argue that the
magnetic ﬁeld structure created by the turbulence depends
critically on the Prandtl number (i.e. the ratio between mag-
netic diﬀusivity and viscosity) and that this in turn aﬀects


=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
6
A. R. King, J. E. Pringle & M. Livio
the saturation level of the dynamo. There is considerable
discussion of the fact that MHD turbulence gives rise to
inverse cascades, and therefore to magnetic ﬁeld structures
which are much larger than the typical driving scales.
4.4
The breakdown of the MHD approximation
The MHD formulation used in these simulations assumes
ﬂuid velocities v ≪c and Alfv´en velocities vA ≪c. It ex-
plicitly excludes the displacement current and so removes
the possibility of electromagnetic waves. A good discusson
of the extension of the MHD approximation to the regime
where the ﬂuid velocities approach the speed of light is pre-
sented by Gammie, McKinney & T´oth (2003). In particular
they note the distinction between behaviour in the MHD
limit when ﬂuid density ρ →0 and in the vacuum case
ρ = 0. Thus the usual MHD formulation is unable to deal
with regions where the densities are low enough that the
approximation of inﬁnite conductivity breaks down and the
distinction between ρ →0 and ρ = 0 becomes critical. There
are severe numerical problems implementing it in regions of
large density contrast such as the interface between the solar
interior and the solar corona, where the ﬁelds are essentially
force–free.
There are also signiﬁcant numerical problems deal-
ing with magnetically dominated outﬂows, or Poynting–
ﬂux dominated jets. The problem is not simply that the
timesteps get very small in numerical simulations where the
density gets small (and so vA is large) – the point is that the
MHD approximation may break down. We note that numeri-
cal studies of the solar corona encounter these problems (e.g.
Galsgaard & Parnell, 2005; T¨or¨ok & Kliem, 2005; Mackay &
van Ballegooijen, 2006a, b) and considerable complication is
involved in dealing with them.
5
DISCUSSION
We have shown that there is a large discrepancy between
the values of the viscosity parameter α which is required
to model observations of fully ionized, time-dependent ac-
cretion discs (Section 2: α ≈0.1 −0.4) and those which
are generally obtained from numerical MHD simulations
without including a superimposed magnetic ﬁeld (Section
3: α ≤0.02). In Section 4 we have described some of the
limitations inherent in the numerical simulations and have
noted that most of these would indeed tend to lead to un-
derestimating the value of α. We here discuss some other
theoretical means of angular momentum transport involving
global ﬁeld structures which lie outside the scope of current
numerical simulations.
We have noted in Section 4 that one of the major restric-
tions in the numerical simulations is on the global structure
of the magnetic ﬁeld. This suppression is driven in part by
the exigency of limited computer resources and in part by
the limitations imposed by the boundary conditions. Per-
haps the closest analogy we have to what might be happen-
ing in an accretion disc comes from looking at the behaviour
of the magnetic ﬁeld at the surface of the sun. Here ﬂuid
motions below the surface, where the MHD approximation
holds reasonably well, drive the generation of buoyant loops
of magnetic ﬂux which rise up through the surface layers
into regions where the MHD approximation is poor, or even
breaks down. These buoyant loops give rise all kinds of com-
plicated magnetic phenomena, including prominences, ﬂares
and the solar wind, many of the details of which are still
poorly understood. But it is evident that the ﬁelds and ﬂux
loops extending outside the solar surface are quite global
in extent. And the radial extent of ﬂux loops can be much
greater in stars which are rapidly rotating (for example ex-
tending at far as 5 times the stellar radius in AB Dor; Hus-
sain et al., 2002). It is well known that small-scale twisting
of magnetic footpoints on the solar surface can give rise to
large-scale changes in the global structure of the ﬁeld (Aly,
1984; Sturrock, 1991), and numerical simulation of the be-
haviour of magnetic ﬁelds in the low-β regions of the so-
lar atmosphere, driven by motions in the high-β regions, is
an active area of research (e.g. Galsgaard & Parnell, 2005;
T¨or¨ok & Kliem, 2005; Mackay & van Ballegooijen, 2006a,
b). In accretion discs, as stressed by Ustyogova et al. (2000)
and by Lynden-Bell (2003), all these phenomena are likely
to be present but driven much more vigorously by the strong
disc shear and by the fact that the disc is rotating so rapidly
that it is centrifugally supported (and so disc velocities are
around 70 percent of the local escape speed).
Tout & Pringle (1996) argue that although the dynamo
process in the disc is likely to give rise to magnetic ﬁeld
structures with predominant poloidal length-scales of order
∼H, it is reasonable to assume that the interaction and
reconnection of such structures outside the plane of the disc
can give rise to an inverse cascade, producing ﬁeld struc-
tures of order ∼R and greater. They suggest that the large-
scale poloidal ﬁelds generated in this manner can be strong
enough to power outﬂows and jets. Of course the presence of
a magnetically driven outﬂow can remove angular momen-
tum from the disc, and so drive accretion, even without a for-
mal kinematic viscosity or α. But in neither the dwarf novae
nor the SXTs is there evidence for such outﬂows. However,
even without driving an outﬂow, large-scale poloidal ﬁelds
outside the plane of the disc can provide a non-negligible
contribution to angular momentum transport, and hence α,
of the kind that does not become apparent from, and can-
not easily be addressed in, the kind of numerical simulations
discussed above. This transport comes about for three main
reasons.
First, such a process can more easily magnetically link
disparate disc radii than processes which require radial pene-
tration of disc material (cf. Armitage, 1998; Fromang & Nel-
son, 2006). Once linked, diﬀerential shear winds up the ﬁeld,
increasing the magnetic energy at the expense of rotational
energy, and therefore transfers angular momentum (cf. the
disc-magnetosphere interaction; Livio & Pringle, 1992).
Second, even if such large-scale poloidal ﬂux loops do
not give rise to a steady outﬂow or wind, they may well
give rise to intermittent outward acceleration of disc mate-
rial. As noted by Blandford & Payne (1982), once a mag-
netic ﬁeld line in a centrifugally supported disc makes an
angle of greater than 60◦to the vertical, material can be
centrifugally accelerated along it. While Blandford & Payne
considered a constant ﬁeld structure with a steady outﬂow,
the same physics applies equally well to intermittent ﬁeld
structures. Thus one can envisage a continuous process by
which small patches of disc material are from time to time
accelerated outwards for brief periods as and when the lo-


=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
Accretion disc viscosity: how big is alpha?
7
cal ﬁeld conﬁguration becomes favourable. The disc material
acquires angular momentum in the process, but not enough
energy to be expelled, and presumably falls back onto the
disc at some larger radius. Such a process leads to outwards
transport of angular momentum by a direct ﬂux of material
moving in regions out of the disc plane. We note in passing
that such a process provides a more plausible radial trans-
port process, required perhaps to explain the properties of
crystalline silicate grains in the pre-solar nebula, than try-
ing to mix material upstream in an accretion disc (e.g. Gail,
2001).
Third, the global ﬁeld envisaged by Tout & Pringle
(1996) generated by an inverse cascade from the tangled
disc ﬁeld is of necessity much weaker than the mean dy-
namo ﬁeld in the disc. But, as the numerical experiments
seem to indicate, the presence of a weak poloidal ﬁeld can
serve to increase the strength of the dynamo process, and
therefore the local value of α. Thus it may be that the disc
itself is capable of generating and sustaining, at least in a
time-averaged sense, the kind of weak global poloidal ﬁeld
required to enhance the value numerically estimated of α.
6
CONCLUSION
Over the last decade, thanks mainly to numerical simula-
tions, we now have a much better understanding of what is
the likely driving mechanism for accretion discs. We have
noted here that there is, however, roughly a factor of 10 dis-
crepancy between observational and theoretical estimates
of the accretion disc viscosity parameter α. We have sug-
gested possible lines for resolving this problem. While rec-
ognizing that this is at best close to the limits of what is
currently computationally feasible, we suggest that it is es-
sential to undertake fully three-dimensional, global simula-
tions, preferably in a large enough computational domain
that the boundary conditions have little eﬀect on dynam-
ics of the thin disc. We have also noted reasons why even
this may not be adequate, and have drawn the analogy with
current attempts to understand the driving of chromospheric
and coronal solar activity by subphotospheric motions. Ev-
idently there may be some way to go before we have a truly
predictive theory of accretion discs.
7
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
ARK acknowledges a Royal Society–Wolfson Research Merit
Award. JEP thanks STScI for hospitality and for continued
support under the Visitors’ Program. We thank the referee
for helping to clarify the contents of the paper.
REFERENCES
Aly, J.J., 1984, ApJ, 283, 349
Bailey, J.A., 1975, J. Brit. Astron. Soc., 86, 30
Bell, K.R., Lin, D.N.C., 1994, ApJ, 427, 987
Blandford, R.D., Payne, D.G., 1982, MNRAS, 199, 883
Bonnell, I., Bastien, P., 1992, ApJ, 401, L31
Brandenburg, A., Nordlund, A., Stein R.F., Torkelsson, U., 1995,
ApJ, 446, 741
Buat-M´enard, V., Hameury, J.-M., Lasota, J.-P., 2001, A&A 369,
925
Cannizzo, J.K., 2001, ApJ, 556, 847
Cannizzo, J.K., 2001, ApJ, 561, L175
Cannizzo, J.K., Chen, W., Livio, M., 1995, ApJ, 454, 880
Clarke, C.J., Lin, D.N.C., Pringle, J.E., 1990, MNRAS, 242, 439
Dubus, G., Hameury, J.-M., Lasota, J.-P., 2001, A&A, 373, 251
Frank, J., King, A.R., Raine, D., 2002, Accretion Power in As-
trophysics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press)
Fromang, S., Nelson, R.P., 2006, A&A, 457, 343
Gail, H.-P., 2001, A&A, 378, 192
Galsgaard, K., Parnell, C.E., 2005, A&A, 439, 335
Gammie, C.F., 1996, ApJ, 457, 355
Gammie, C.F., McKinney, J.C., T´oth, G., 2003, ApJ, 589, 444
Hartmann, L., 1998, Accretion Processes in Star Formation, Cam-
bridge University Press
Hartmann, L., Calvet, N., Gullbring, E., D’Alessio, P., 1998, ApJ,
495, 385
Hawley, J.F., Gammie, C.F., Balbus, S.A., 1995, ApJ, 440, 742
Hawley, J.F., Krolik, J.H., 2001, ApJ, 548, 348
Hirose, S., Krolik, J.H., de Villiers, J.P., 2004, ApJ 606, 1083
Hirose, S., Krolik, J.H., Stone, J.M., 2006, ApJ, 640, 901
Hussain, G.A.J., van Ballegooijen, A.A., Jardine, M., Collier
Cameron A., 2002, ApJ, 575, 1078
King A.R., Ritter, H., 1998, MNRAS, 293, L42
Lasota, J.-P., 2001, NewAR, 45, 449
Lewin, W., van der Klis, M., 2006, Compact Stellar X-ray Sources,
Cambridge University Press.
Livio, M., Pringle, J.E., 1992, MNRAS, 259, 23
Lodato, G., Clarke, C.J., 2004, MNRAS, 353, 841
Lovelace, R.V.E., Romanova, M.M., Contopoulos, J., 1993, ApJ,
403, 158
Lynden-Bell, D., 2003, MNRAS, 341, 1360
Mackay, D.H., van Ballegooijen, A.A., 2006a, ApJ, 641, 577
Mackay, D.H., van Ballegooijen, A.A., 2006b, ApJ, 642, 1193
Menou, K., Hameury, J.M., Lasota, J.P., Narayan, R., 2000, MN-
RAS, 314, 498
Miller, K.A., Stone, J.M., 2000, ApJ, 534, 398
Nelson, R.P., 2005, A&A, 443, 1067
Nelson, R.P, Papaloizou, J.C.B., 2003, MNRAS, 339, 983
Pelletier, G., Pudritz, R.E., 1992, ApJ 394, 117
Pringle, J.E., 1981, ARA&A, 19, 137
Pringle, J.E., 1993, in ’Astrophysical Jets’, eds. D. Burgarella, M.
Livio & C.P. O’Dea, Cambridge University Press, 1
Pringle, J.E., Tout, C.A., 1992, MNRAS, 259, 604
Pringle, J.E., Tout, C.A., 1996, MNRAS, 281, 291
Reipurth, B., Aspin, C., 2004, ApJ, 608, L65
Sano, T., Inutsuka, S., Turner, N.J., Stone, J.M., 2004, ApJ, 605,
321
Schekochihin, A.A., Cowley, S.C., Taylor, S.F., Maron, J.L.,
McWilliams, J.C., 2004, ApJ, 612, 276
Schekochihin, A.A., Haugen, N.E.L., Brandenburg, A., Cowley,
S.C., Maron, J.L., McWilliams, J.C., 2005, ApJ, 625, L115
Schreiber, M. R., Hameury, J.-M., Lasota, J.-P., 2003, A&A, 410,
239
Schreiber, M. R., Hameury, J.-M., Lasota, J.-P., 2004, A&A, 427,
621
Smak, J. (1998) Acta Astr, 48, 677
Smak, J. (1999) Acta Astr, 49, 391
Starling, R.L.C., Siemiginowska, A., Uttley, P., Soria, R., 2004,
MNRAS, 347, 67
Steinacker, A., Papaloizou, J.C.B., 2002, ApJ, 571, 413
Stone, J.M., Hawley, J.H., Gammie, C.F., Balbus, S.A., 1996,
ApJ, 463, 656
Sturrock, P.A., 1991, ApJ, 380, 655
T¨or¨ok, T., Kliem, B., 2005, ApJ, 630, L97
Tout, C.A., Pringle, J.E., 1996, MNRAS, 281, 219


=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
8
A. R. King, J. E. Pringle & M. Livio
Ustyogova, G.V., Lovelace, R.V.E., Romanova, M.M., LI, H., Col-
gate, S.A., 2000, ApJ, 541, L21.
Wade, R.A., 1984, MNRAS, 208, 381
Warner, B., 2003, Cataclysmic Variable Stars, Cambridge Uni-
versity Press
Winters, W.F., Balbus, S.A., Hawley, J.F., 2003, ApJ, 589, 543
